Outlines of comparative anatomy (1835-1841)General Observations on the Osseous System of Animals. As animals are organized to select and obtain foreign matter for their subsistence, and to convey it into their digestive organs, to be transported with them from place to place, they generally require some solid means of support for the attachment of their active organs of motion. These denser parts of the body serve as a solid framework to give form and solidity to the whole fabric, and to protect the more delicate organs. They consist for the most part of earthy materials separated from the food by the vital processes of the animal, and may be placed on the exterior or in the in- terior of the soft parts. These inert materials, or passive organs of locomotion receive their forms from those of the soft parts, and are liable to change with the varying condi- tions of the contiguous living parts. When placed on the exterior of the body, they may, without being organized, keep pace with the progress of growth in the living parts, by being periodically cast off and renewed ; or they may in- crease by the addition of more extended layers to their surface ; or their dimensions may be continually influenced by the contact of the parts which formed them. But when this solid frame-work is internal, and is everywhere sur- rounded by the soft parts, giving attachment to muscles, or enveloping and protecting delicate organs, it cannot be con- veniently removed from the system in a mass, nor preserve its proportions by the mechanical addition of layers to its sur- face, and is generally organized or permeated in every point by the soft parts which absorb the decayed materials and re- new them particle by particle. The earthy materials thus formed by animals for the support of their soft parts are various, and their particles are generally united together by means of a condensed albuminous or gelatinous matter, which gives firmness and tenacity to the mass. Silica is found in the lowest forms of radiated animals ; carbonate of lime in the molluscous classes ; carbonate and phosphate of lime in the articulated animals, and phosphate of lime in the organized skeletons of the vertebrata. These earths, in consolidating, assume forms by the influence of laws which are in accordance with their ordinary physical properties, this we observe most obviously in the lowest animals, and least in the highest classes where the crystalline arrangement of the par- ticles is most equivocal ; but under every condition they alike form a normal part of the structure, a solid frame-work more or less complete, constant in its form and structure in the same species, and varying in its form with the speci- fic differences of animals. This solid framework forms the osseous system of animals, or the skeleton, as it has been termed from the dry and earthy nature of the materials which compose it. The osseous system, though not the most important nor the most universal system of animal or- ganization, is met with under some form in every class of the animal kingdom, though not in all the animals of each class. Organs of Support in the Radiated, or Cycto-neurose Classes. THE skeletons are as various as the forms of the animals in this lowest division of the animal kingdom, and scarcely indicate in their composition or structure a determinate plan common to the whole. They are sometimes external, most frequently internal, often composed of minute pieces sym- metrically arranged, or of one solid mass, often of a thin flexible diaphanous horny consistence, or composed of dense silicious or calcareous spicula, or of masses of carbonate with a little phosphorate of lime. The osseous parts in these classes appear to be extravascular, and to grow by the juxtaposition of new portions, and from the simplicity of the general structure and functions of these animals, and the in- ternal situation of their solid parts, they are not exuvi- able. I. Polyyastrica. Many of the minute and soft polygastric animalcules possess an exterior firm, elastic covering, which protects the more delicate internal parts. This covering sometimes consists only of a more condensed form of the common integument, enveloping every part of the body, in others it forms a distinct thin pellucid sheath into which the animal can withdraw its soft parts for protection. The exterior surface, even of the softest and most naked animalcules, supports the organs of motion the minute vi- bratile cilia by which they are carried to and fro, and consists apparently of a thin film of the general cellular tissue of their body, rendered more firm in its texture by the con- tinued action of the surrounding element. This condensa- tion of the exterior integument is the origin of most of the skeletons of invertebrated animals, which have generally the organs of support thrown over the surface of their body to afford them at the same time protection. We have an example of one of these loricated animalcules in the volvox globator, (Fig. 1. A) so common in stagnant pools of fresh water, and which often owe their green colour to the abun- dance of this animalcule. This sperical transparent green coloured, tuberculated animalcule exhibits in its interior nu- merous smaller, round, spotted, and similarly formed beings moving to and fro, as seen at A, and the entire volvox does not change or vary its external form while it is seen swimming about slowly with the enclosed young. When the exterior capsule, or the parent animalcule bursts, as is represented at B, and the young have escaped, we observe its fragments to retain their original form with some degree of elasticity when they are tossed about in the fluid by the motions of other animalcules. We see the same transparent elastic integument giving form, and support to the volvox morum, (Fig. 1 . C.) which contains a much greater number of young in its interior, and the same is seen also enveloping the separate globules which compose the body of the gonium pectorals. (Fig. I. D.) But the most distinct form .of the skeleton met with in this class, is that which envelopes the body as a sheath, into which the animalcule can withdraw its soft parts when alarmed, and from which it can extend its ciliated anterior portion for the purposes of nourishment, respiration, or progressive motion. This vaginiform, exterior, thin, pellucid, elastic covering is seen in the vaginicola innata, common in sea water. This animalcule, formed like a vorticella, is seen in Fig. 1. E, extending its ciliated anterior margin from the opening in its sheath, and swimming by the action of its cilia. The same animalcule is represented at Fig. 1. F with- drawn into its transparent covering and fixed by its candiform projecting posterior part. This form of the skeleton seen in the vaginicola leads to the vaginiform horny coverings of campanularue, and other forms of keratophytes. There are about thirty known genera of polygastric animalcules which possess a firm elastic exterior covering, more or less envelop- ing the body, and analogous to the more solid skeletons of higher classes. II. Poriphera. The skeleton of poripherous animals con- sists of separate minute, earthy, crystalline spicula, connected together by a condensed, elastic, cellular substance j or of tubular elastic filaments of a horny consistence. These hard parts are developed internally throughout the whole cellular tissue of the body, and are often protruded externally through the surface, to protect the pores, or the large vents. The earthy spicula in most of these animals are silicious, in many they are calcareous, and, like the horny filaments of other species, they appear to be tubular like many natural crystals, and to have no aperture leading into their internal cavity. The spicula are generally united into fasciculi by an enveloping glutinous, or condensed cellular substance, and by the junction of these fasciculi in various modes, fibres are formed which traverse every part of the body, forming the boundaries of canals and orifices, and giving form and sup- port to the whole of the gelatinous or soft cellular substance of the animal. The forms of these hard parts are different in every distinct species of these animals, and they are con- stant in the same, so that they present useful characters for the distinction of species in this polymorphous class. They are formed from materials due to the vital energies of the animal, and they form normal and necessary parts of its structure, like the solid skeletons of higher animals. In Fig 2 is represented at A the haliclona occulata ; one of these soft animals, with a silicious skeleton. It is represented as alive, suspended from a rock by its spreading branched base of attachment (c,) the currents of water are seen at (a) rush- ing in through the pores, and issuing from the internal canals by the large orifices or vents at (b). The pores, canals, and orifices are seen exposed in the longitudinal section of the same poripherous animal at B. Fibres composed of bundles of spicula generally extend in a longitudinal direc- tion in these animals from the base of attachment to the remotest points of the surface. Smaller transverse fibres of the same composition connect those which are disposed longitudinally, and form the frame-work of the internal canals. The form of the spicula which belong to several distinct species of poripherous animals are shewn in Fig. 2. at C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M., each of these forms belong- ing to a distinct animal, and serving to characterize it. The pores are surrounded with groups of spicula disposed in such a manner as to strengthen and protect the parietes of these minute orifices, and to form a delicate net-work over the whole surface of the body, as shewn on a magnified scale at O, and a single pore is shewn at N still more magnified, with its bounding and defending spicula, and a delicate gelatinous net- work, which protects it from the entrance of small foreign particles floating in the water. The silicious spicula are found in some of these animals while they are yet floating gemmules newly detached from the parent mass, and seeking a suitable place to fix and develope. One of these gem- mules is figured at P, highly magnified, and broken to show the spicula already developed in the cellular substance of this minute embryo. Similar silicious spicula occur abundantly in plants with which these poripherous animals are the most nearly allied. Several of the animals of this class have the skeleton composed of calcareous spicula which have generally more complex forms than the silicious. They are disposed in the same manner and for the same object through the in- terior cellular substance of the body. They impart a white colour to the whole body of the animals in which they occur. They do not appear to occur along with silicious spicula in the same animal. The skeleton is generally more loose and friable in the calcareous poriphera, and the connecting gluti- nous and cellular matter is less abundant. One of these white friable calcareous poriphera, the leuconia compressa, very common in our seas, is represented in Fig. 3 at 4 in form of a compressed lengthened sac suspended by its peduncle from any submarine substance The pores through which the currents are conveyed into this sack are seen all over the ex- terior surface, as at a a ; the canals are contained within the thickness of its parietes, and the large vents or fecal orifices here open into the interior, as seen where it is broken open at b. The sac being open only at its pendent extremity d, the whole of the inhaled water rushes incessantly out through that general aperture. In the silicious skeletons of this class we find but one form of spiculum for each ani- mal ; but in the calcareous generally two, and one of these has a triradiate form, as represented in Fig. 3 at 1. This triradiate form of calcareous spiculum is accompanied by one of some other form, as by that clavate form of spiculum be- longing to the leuconia compressa, shewn in Fig. 3 at 2 ; the small spicula in Fig. 3 at 3, found in the same animal ap- pear to be only fragments of triradiate spicula. The tri- radiate spicula chiefly bound the pores, canals, and orifices, while the curved ends of the clavate spicula hang over the exterior entrance of the pores to protect them. The cal- careous spicula do not appear to occur in any of these animals along with silicious forms, and the true horny tubular filaments appear also to occur alone in the more tropical species, with- out either silicious or calcareous spicula. The calcareous forms of these animals appear to be much more rare, and generally much smaller than the silicious or the horny species. In the horny species of poriphera the skeleton consists of thin elastic tubular translucent filaments united together and distributed around the pores, canals, and vents. These horny, tough, flexible threads have a close analogy in their mode of distribution through the whole interior of the body to the tough connecting matterof the spicula in the earthy species, and they give form and support to the whole fabric. Sometimes the internal canal which extends through these tubular horny filaments is filled with an opaque matter which gives a greater friability to the threads ; but most frequently they contain only a transparent colourless fluid, as we see in the fibres of the common officinal sponge, which is a poripherous animal be- longing to this horny group. The skeleton of all the poripherous ani- mals is so soft and flexible in the living state, that none of the lengthened forms appear to be capable of growing in an upright position from their base of attachment. They hang down from the under sur- face of submarine bodies, as represented in these figures. A specimen of the common officinal sponge with a horny fi- brous skeleton, is repre- sented in fig. 4 at 2, as alive and cut from its point of attach- ment, c. The circular minute pores by which the streams of water enter the internal tortuous canals are seen all over the surface, as at a #, and the large vents by which the currents issue from the body are seen on the most prominent parts, as at bb. The manner in which the horny filaments are united to each other throughout the whole mass of the body is seen at fig. 4, 1 , where the broken ends of the fibres show their tubular character, and this is still more magnified at fig. 4.* The meshes formed by these horny fibres, though apparently without order or regularity when the soft parts are removed, have the closest relation to the pores and the tortuous canals which wind through every part of the body. Now we see in these simple skeletons of poripherous ani- mals, as in many vegetables still more remote from human organization, that nature begins the formation of an internal framework for the support and protection of the soft parts, by the deposition of detached earthy spicula throughout the cellular substance of the body, as we see in the human em- bryo the deposition of minute spicula of phosphate of lime in various parts of the soft gelatinous bones begins the con- solidation of the skeleton. The abundance of silicious needles in the skeletons of the lowest poriphera assists in their conversion into flint, when their remains have been ex- posed for ages in chalk or other strata traversed by silicifying percolations. III. Polypiphera. The skeletons of zoophytes present a great variety of forms and characters, being branched or globular, or filiform, free or fixed, solid, massive, and calca- reous, or soft, flexible, and horny, external or internal. The animals of this class obtaining their food by polypi, or highly organized sacs developed from the fleshy substance of the body, we generally find the skeletons, whether external or internal, to present cavities or cells for the reception and protection of these delicate organs ; and the various forms of these cells constitute a principal distinction among the skeletons of this class. The simplest forms of the skeleton are presented by the horny zoophytes, or keratophytes, where it sometimes consists of tough, soft, flexible filaments which surround the cells of the polypi throughout the whole mass of the body, as in the alcyonium and lobularia. These form a transition from the horny species of poriphera to the more distinct forms of keratophytes. In the horny species of zoophytes the skeleton sometimes forms a tubular external sheath enveloping the fleshy substance throughout all the ramifications of the body, as in all the sertularia, plumularice, antennular'uR* and many other soft, flexible, and ramified forms. The horny skeleton is sometimes formed by the deposition of successive layers within the fleshy substance of the animal, as in the gorgonia and antipathes. We have an example of an external, tubular, horny skeleton in the common campanularia dichotoma, Fig. 5, where we observe it enveloping as a sheath the fleshy substance which occupies the centre of all the divisions of the root, the stem, and the branch- es. The exterior horny sheath which is exuded upon the surface of the flesh is seen at a, and this sheath expands at the extremities of all the branches to form cells, b, for the lodgment of polypi e, i. The base of attach- ment, spread out and ram- ified like a root, exhibits the same fleshy interior, and the horny covering extended over all its divisions at c. A magnified view of a small portion of a branch is represented at Fig. 5. 2, which shows the fleshy granular or cellular substance f in the centre, surrounded by the tough, elastic, amber coloured skeleton exuded upon its surface *. In the axillae of many of the branches we observe large vesicles, 1 1, for the protection and development of the embryo. These vesicles in the vagini- form keratophytes are composed of the same firm pellucid substance as the rest of the skeleton ; and from the con- stancy of their forms in the same animal, and their differ- ences according to the species, they afford useful characters for the distinction of these animals. They are deciduous parts of the skeleton as they fall off after the matured gem- mules have escaped from their interior. These gemmules are seen in little ciliated capsules at m m, and the polypi are seen in the same figure extended in various attitudes from the cells, in search of animalcules as food. The skeleton of these vaginiform zoophytes often presents a jointed appear- ance on the stem or branches, as seen in the campanularia at/"; these consist of circular indentations of the surface which do not pass through the interior of the body where they would interrupt the circulation of the nutritious fluid which passes through the fleshy substance in all parts of the body. They allow of a certain degree of flexibility at the most suitable parts of the skeleton, and in some of the horny cellariae they are connected with the deciduous character of the branches. In the gorgonia, and some other cortical zoophytes, there is an exterior fleshy substance in the living state which covers all parts of the horny skeleton. This fleshy exterior crust is indeed the animal, which forms by the deposition of successive layers the whole of the flexible branched, horny, and solid internal skeleton. If we make a transverse section of a thick portion of the gorgonia, or antipathes, we can easily perceive the concentric layers of which it is composed ; and by peeling off the cortical fleshy mass from the exterior, and placing this living flesh in the sea, we find it to secret a new internal horny axis for itself. The polypi, which are always and necessarily continuations of the fleshy substance of zoophytes, are developed from this thick fleshy crust in the cortical kinds, and hence we do not see any appearance of cells on the central horny axis in these animals, after the flesh has been removed. In the calcareous zoophytes the solid mass forming the skeleton is composed chiefly of the carbonate of lime, with a little of the phosphate, and the same condensed glutinous matter which forms the entire skeleton in the keratophytes, is diffused through the whole of the calcareous mass in the more solid lithophytes, where it serves to aglutinate the earthy particles, and to give solidity and tenacity to the en- tire mass. The calcareous skeletons of lithophytes are for the most part internal, massive, and consisting of a single piece. In madrepores, and many similar forms, the thin fleshy crust penetrates to a considerable extent the loose, porous surface of the calcareous mass, from which it is capable of receiving some protection, and consequently we perceive distinct indications of the positions of the polypi on the surface of the skeleton in these animals. These cells, for the protection of the polypi, have generally a radiated lamellar structure, and vary remarkably in their size and also in their form in different lithophytes. They are very minute in the porites, larger in the madrepores, still larger in the caryophyllia, and the fungia agariciformis forms but one enormous cell for the lodgment of a polypus like an actinia. In some of the lithophytes the fleshy crust, as in the cortical kinds of keratophytes, is of great thickness, and the polypi developed from this fleshy exterior mass leave no indications of their position on the surface of the internal calcareous axis. This is seen in the common red coral, which is a solid internal calcareous skeleton, striated with superficial lon- gitudinal grooves, but presenting no calcareous cells for the polypi, which are protected solely by the fleshy thick covering of which they form parts. In the agaricm, mean- drinte, and many others, we observe a laminated general sur- face of the skeleton for the protection of the fleshy mass, but no distinct cells for the polypi. In the virgularm the skeleton consists of a straight internal calcareous solid cylindrical pillar, occupying the longitudinal axis of the body, and protruding from the lower part of the animal. In the pennatula the internal calcareous axis is soft and flexible at its extremities, from the abundant proportion of glutinous matter in its composition, and to allow of the necessary con- tractions and extensions of the animal's body in a longitudi- nal direction. In the isis the internal solid calcareous skeleton is jointed at regular and short distances throughout the whole body, and there are no external cells for the polypi, which are entirely confined to the thick fleshy crust which covers the entire animal in the living state. The joints here consist of the same glutinous tough matter which pervades the whole calcareous axis, and are only uncalcified portions of the general solid axis. They are formed by con- centric layers, like the calcified solid portions of the skeleton, and they allow of considerable flexion in the branches and stem of this delicate ramified, and highly organized animal. As in most other classes of invertebrata, we find many zoophytes which are destitute of an external or internal skeleton, as the common fresh water polype, or hydra. Be- sides the solid internal skeleton in the corticiferous zoophytes we commonly find in the fleshy crust itself minute calcareous spicula. These small spicula compose the hard crust which is seen covering the horny axis of the gorgonia, as it is com- monly preserved dried in cabinets ; and in their occurring thus spread through the general fleshy mass in gorgonue, lobularia, and many other zoophytes we observe a lingering analogy with the spicular form of the skeleton in the class of pori- pherous animals, especially in the calcareous group. The skeleton in the keratophytes is exuded from the fleshy sub- stance in a soft and semi-fluid state, and quickly hardens after its separation from the living parts upon which it is moulded. As the skeletons of zoophytes are not permeated by vessels, or organized as it is termed, their materials do not expand by growth, but encrease in dimensions by the mechanical addi- tion of new matter. Hence in the vaginiform keratophytes, as plumularia and campanularice, we find the base or lower part of the stem, which was formed in the younger state of the animal, to be smaller than the upper part of the stem, which was formed of larger dimensions when the animal, or the contained fleshy substance, had encreased in bulk and de- velopment. The large globular masses ofmeandrince, astr&ce, and similar solid lithophytes encrease in bulk by the constant addition of new superficial layers of calcareous matter upon the same primitive plan by the polypherous fleshy covering of the mass. From the origin, and the mode of growth of these calcareous masses, it is obvious that when torn from their primitive seat, they may re-attach themselves, or con- tinue to grow, by the deposition or exudation of new matter, as long as the secreting fleshy crust retains its vitality. These extra-vascular skeletons appear to be very little modi- fied by the contact of the living fleshy parts after they have been once deposited in a soft state, portion by portion, and fully consolidated by the hardening of the glutinous matter in the keratophytes, or by the deposition of earthy matter in the more solid lithophytes. It is by the contact of living membranes, in the form of capillary vessels, containing fluids, that the decayed earthy particles of organized skeletons are removed, and have new particles exuded in their place. There are some skeletons of this class which retain an intermediate degree of conso- lidation between the solid lithophytes and the horny flexible keratophytes, as we see in theflustra and calcareous cetlaria, where the proportion of earthy matter is very small com- pared with the quantity of tough glutinous substance in their flexible skeletons, and we observe them to be thin, soft, transparent, and gelatinous all around their free and growing margins. When these skeletons, whether horny or calcareous, have once been consolidated, they are, like the shells of articulata and mollusca, or like the antlers of the deer, no longer susceptible of growth, and they enlarge or extend by the successive additions of new matter, or of new parts. The carbonate of lime is the common consolidating earth of zoophytes, as silica is that of poriphera ; and these are two of the most abundant materials of the mineral kingdom. By the abundance of these calcareous lithophytes on the shallow shores of the tropical seas, they prepare a rich soil for new islands and continents to be raised by volcanic action from the deep, while they at the same time tend to purify the mass of the ocean for the maintenance of higher animals by thus precipitating, in an insoluble state, the corrosive materials conveyed incessantly into its bed by rivers that wash the surface of continents. The deep purple colours of the corrallium, the tubipora, the corallina, and many others, the azure blue of the pocillopora, the bright yellow of the melitaa, and all the other lively colours seen in these calca- reous skeletons are removed by the action of heat, and do not appear to depend on any peculiar mineral ingredient ; and we observe the same animal nature of the colouring matter in the shells of articulata and mollusca, and in the coloured bones of many vertebrated animals. These skeletons of zoophytes are not exudations from the surface of polypi ; the cell always precedes the existence of the polypus which is developed within it. They are de- veloped from the gelatinous substance of the reproductive gemmules before any polypi begin to be formed, and they continue to be developed and extended by the fleshy mass of the zoophyte whether polypi are developed in the cells or not. There is but one life, and one plan of development in the whole mass ; and these depend not on the polypi which are but secondary, and often deciduous parts, but on the general fleshy substance of the body. IV. Acalepha. Although there are no solid skeletons in any of the soft, gelatinous, free, and floating animals of this class, we generally perceive some firmer cartilaginous por- tions of the body which afford support to the organs of pro- gressive motion or of prehension. There are crescentic car- tilaginous lamine around the inferior central part of the body in the medusae which give support to the contracting fleshy overhanging mantle, and to the absorbent tubes pro- longed from that part. There are firm superficial longitudi- nal bands in most of the ciliograde acalepha for the support of those minute vibratile fins by the motions of which they are carried through the sea. From the feebleness of their muscular system, and from their swimming habits, it is obvious that the acalepha can only support the lightest forms of the skeleton. In the velella limbosa, Fig. 6, which floats on the surface of the sea there is a thin flexible per- pendicular crest, (Fig. 6. 2. a,) which is covered with a thin layer of the deep blue coloured mantle, and which rests obliquely on a horizontal stronger transpa- rent flexible plate, (Fig. 6, 2 b.) The thin perpendicular crest, which rises above the water and serves as a sail, appears to be composed of the same condensed glutinous or horny substance which composes the skeletons of the keratophytes. The horizontal plate is thicker, concave below, marked with concentric lines of growth, and gives support to the deep blue mantle above, to the delicate marginal tentacula, (seen at b b, in both views of the velella,) to the numerous tubular suckers, and to the stomach placed beneath this concave horizontal plate. The porpita, which is another of these floating acalepha, presents a similar thin plate, to this horizontal lamina of the velella, for the support of the same parts, but of a round form, of a white colour, and of a porous texture. These two simple genera of acalepha present examples of the thin, light, and delicate forms of the skeletons which we find in almost all the floating marine invertebrata. V. Echinoderma. The skeletons of the animals of this class are generally in the form of external crusts or shells, covered with projecting spines. They are composed of the carbonate, mixed with a small but variable proportion of the phosphate of lime, and are hardened by animal matter. The phosphate is always in a small quantity compared with the carbonate of lime, but is more abundant in the solid shells of the echinida than in the softer coriaceous and tuberculated coverings of the stellerida. The skeleton of all these animals consists of numerous detached or separate pieces, which protect the interior viscera, give attachment to the organs of motion, and generally give form to the whole body. The solid pieces which compose the skeleton are for the most part in form of calcareous plates, symmetrical in their shape and in their arrangement, and which present considerable uniformity of plan in their disposition throughout the diversified forms of this class. The body most frequently presents a radiated form in the animals of this class, the parts projecting in a stellular manner from around a longitudinal axis, as is seen in the various crinoid animals fixed by a jointed peduncle and ramified above, and in the various forms of existing stellerida, as the asterias, the ophinra, the euryale, and the comatula, which are not fixed by a peduncle ; and we can easily observe the same plan of structure in the more con- centrated and globular forms of the echinida, as the scutellae, the clypeasters, the spatangi, and the echini. The radiating portions of these animals are composed of numerous rings or segments, like the trunk and members of articulated animals, and each of these component seg- ments is surrounded by numerous calcareous plates. One of these radiated or stellular forms of echinoderma is seen in the common asterias aurantiaca, (Fig. 7- A.) where there are five rays or divisions of the body, the number most frequent in this class. On examining the sides of these rays from above,, as the animal is placed in the figure, we observe the ends of large lateral plates (Fig. 7, A. a a a) which bound the margins of all the rays. These plates are connected with others which surround chiefly the sides and lower surface above, and presents an exterior surface marked by numerous tortuous grooves, like the surface of a meandrina. In its concave interior surface it protects a small membranous sac, which contains a thick grumous matter chiefly composed of carbonate of lime with a little phosphate, and was supposed by Tiedemann to be the organ which separates from the fluids of the body the calcareous matter of the exterior covering. The arrangement of the plates enveloping the segments is very similar to this in all the other forms of asterias, how- ever they may vary in the number of the rays, and in the ophiurce where the rays do not contain prolongations of the digestive and generative organs,, and in the other forms of stellerida. In the more compact forms of the echinida, the skeleton is more solid, contains more phosphate of lime, and the component plates are arranged with more obvious symmetry. The plates are arranged in perpendicular or longitudinal columns extending from around the mouth to the anus, as is seen in the figure of the common echinus esculentus, (Fig. 7 5 B.) which represents the entire shell, as seen from above, and deprived of its exterior spines. Some of these vertical columns are seen to be perforated with the same kind of small round oblique ambulacral holes as in the asterias. These perforated ambulacral columns, (Fig. 7? B, ,,,) are ten in number, disposed two and two together, so as to form five pairs. The letters a, a, a, point to the middle line of separation between each pair of ambulacral columns. Between these five pairs of small perforated columns are placed alternately five pairs of columns of. larger tuberculated plates which are not perforated for the feet. These tuberculated columns in pairs interposed between the successive pairs .of ambulacral columns are seen in Fig. 7 5 B at b ; and the line of separa- tion between the tuberculated and the ambulacral columns is represented at c, c. The whole exterior of the shell being covered in the recent state with moveable spines attached to the tubercles we cannot perceive the arrangement of these vertical columns of separate plates till the spines are re- moved, or the shell is broken and viewed on the inner sur- face. A small portion of the shell of the echinus esculentus, magnified and viewed from the inner surface, where the ar- of the rays, and form the ambulacral grooves below for the tubular fleshy feet. Besides the tuberculated coriaceous irritable skin covering the upper or dorsal part of each small segment of each ray, we can generally distinguish eight calcareous plates placed transversely on each segment, and surrounding its sides and lower surface. In the sea-star represented in the figure there are eighty of these transverse divisions or segments in each of the five rays of the animal. In all the segments of a single ray there are about seven hundred plates, and about three thousand five hundred cal- careous pieces in the segments of the whole animal. The concave lower surface of each ray is perforated by numerous pairs of small oblique holes placed on each side of a longitu- dinal median line, which are the ambulacral perforations for the tubular fleshy suckers, by which these animals drag themselves along the bottom of the sea, or up the perpendi- cular sides of rocks. The lateral and dorsal parts of the segments often support fixed or moveable spines which grow like the plates themselves by the successive addition of calcareous layers from the thin fleshy secreting membrane which covers every part of the calcareous skeletons ofechino- derma. When we examine the fractured edges of these shells, we observe the colouring matter of the surface to pass under the superficial tubercles, which appear not to be continuous por- tions of the plates to which they adhere by a broad spreading circular base. The tubercles are few on the small terminal plates, but numerous on the large pieces in the middle of the columns. There are at an average at least ten tubercles for each tubercular plate, and three tubercles for each of the tuberculated portions (Fig. 8, 1, b, b,) of the ambulacra! plates. Every tubercle of the shell supports an external, moveable, calcareous spine ; so that there are more than ten thousand pieces in the shell of the echinus esculentus, without counting the complicated dental apparatus of the mouth, or the respira- tory and ovarial plates, or the very minute calcareous pieces disposed irregularly on the coriaceous membrane around the oral and the anal orifices. There are five large heart-shaped plates disposed around the anal aperture, as seen in the central part of Fig. 7- B, each of which is perforated by a large round hole for the termination of one of the five oviducts. Between the tapering exterior ends of these five ovarial plates there are five smaller heart-shaped plates, each of which is likewise per- forated with a small round hole. Around the lower orifice of the shell the last pairs of tubercular plates send in arched processes which meet each other over the ambulacral plates, nud u;ive a fixed and extensive surface for the muscles of the dental apparatus. The five teeth and their alveoli are repre- sented as seen laterally at Fig. 8, 2, and as seen from above at Fig. 8. 3. There are five teeth, (Fig. 8, 2, 0, a,) of a compact and dense texture where they project downwards from the alveoli, and of a loose and fibrous structure at their upper part, where they are enclosed in their complicated alveoli. The alveoli (Fig. 8, 2, b, b,) are long, slightly curved, hollow, tapering from above downwards, moveable individually and collectively, and held in connection by several distinct move- able pieces, (Fig. 8, 3, b, b y ) at their proximal extremities. This dental apparatus, which exists also in the cidaris, is wanting in the spatangus, and several other genera. The exterior surface of the shell is covered, in the echinida, with solid calcareous spines, which rest and move upon the round tubercles. These spines are very large in the cidaris, where the shell is small ; and they are small in the echinus and spatangus where the shell is large. They grow like the other parts of the shell, by successive deposition from the enveloping fleshy substance. Sec- tions of these spines, and of the tubercles on which they rest, are represented in Fig. 9, where 1, represents the entire spine of the common echinus esculentus, and 2, a transverse section of the same spine. In some of these external spines of echinida the growth appears to be effected by the addition of calcareous matter only to the proximal extremity, or fixed ends of the spines. The lines of growth do not then converge and meet in the longitudinal sections, but diverge and terminate at the sides of the spines. This structure is seen in the spines of the cidaris pistillaris, represented in Fig. 9, 4, 5, 6, where a is the tubercle with a cavity at its summit, as we commonly find in the animals of this genus ; b is the concave base of the spine, with a cavity in its centre, as in the tubercle on which it moves. The compact portion of the spine formed within the capsule is seen occupying the middle of its whole extent, and the successive layers of growth are observed extending from this central portion to the sides along the whole spine. A view of the base of this spine is given at Fig. 9, 5, and a transverse section of its middle is represented at Fig. 9, 6', where we see the concentric layers of growth around the middle compact portion. Interspersed among the spines of the echini we find small, fleshy, cylindrical organs which ter- minate in three moveable calcareous spines. Many of the echinoderma have no external skeleton, and are covered only with a coriaceous irritable skin. In the holothuria, which are animals of this kind, there are only five pairs of small calcareous pieces disposed around the mouth like the dental apparatus of the echini. These pieces give support to the ramified tentacula, and afford a firm attachment to the strong longitudinal muscular bands which encompass the body. The animals of this great division have the trunk of the body for the most part long and cylindrical, divided trans- versely into segments, and provided with numerous pairs of organs of motion symmetrically disposed along the sides. From their activity, their skeleton is generally in form of a light, thin, exterior, enveloping, condensed integument, to the inner surface of which the muscles are attached through the medium of the cutis, and which is periodically cast and renewed, to allow of the growth and increase of the en- closed soft parts. The articulated appearance of the skele- tons in these animals is generally proportioned to the density of its texture. Where the whole skeleton is soft and flexi- ble, there are few or no traces of articulations, and where its texture is dense and unyielding, the articulations are most distinct and complete ; hence in the helmithoid classes, and in the young state of the entomoid animals, the articulated appearance of the skeleton is less distinct than in the adult forms of the articulated animals with articulated members. The tubular form of the hard enveloping parts of the arti- culated animals, and their unorganized nature require them to be exuviable, and as they are thus the result of a single effort of formation, they are always thin and light coverings. They are not reinforced by successive deposits added to the surface, through the whole of life, as in the molluscous classes, and consequently we find but little of that softer material, the carbonate of lime, employed in their consolida- tion. The more dense material of the phosphate of lime is almost always substituted for that earth, as we see also in the vertebrated classes. In some of the more solid and massive coverings, however, of these animals we meet with the carbonate of lime, as in the serpula, the cirrhopods, and the Crustacea. VI. Entozoa. The intestinal worms have for the most part a tough exterior, transparent and almost hermogenous covering spread over their whole body, to which they owe their peculiar stiffness and elasticity, and to the inner surface of which their cutaneous muscles are attached. This part is composed of the true skin, and that epidermic covering which becomes consolidated into a dense exterior skeleton in higher classes. It is here soft and elastic, to allow them with more ease and safety to move through the tough and constantly moving parts of the living animals in which they reside. The long cylindrical bodies of these parasitic worms would be impeded in their motions by any ,hard, inflexible shelly covering which likewise could not be cast off and renewed in such a medium; hence their smooth, glistening,and unctuous covering has only that degree of density and toughness, which is adapted to protect them from tearing and compression during the movements of the living parts around them. This trans- parent elastic tunic is especially thick and firm in the long cylin- drical, filiform, or trematoid en- tozoa,as thejilaria,ihe strongylus, the echinorhynchus, and the as- caris. Intheascaris lumbricoides, which is represented in Fig. 10, A, this covering is thick and tough ; but so transparent as to allow the white layers of muscular fibres to be perceived through it. The three moveable oral lobes are seen at 0, the abdominal nerves are seen as a single line running along the middle of the ventral surface, and separat- ing to encompass the vulva at b, and the anal opening is seen near the posterior termination of the body at d. In the jointed teenies and bothriocephali, this covering is soft and thin, these being almost aggregates of simpler animals, and it is still more thin and dilatible in the hydatids and caenuri. This exterior covering often presents an irregular transversely-corrugated appearance during the contracted state of the long filiform antozoa, which arises from the still irregular attachment of the interior interrupted longitudinal muscular fibres ; and these irregular transverse corrugations present us with the first condition of those joints and rings which become so regular and distinct in higher articulated classes. This exterior soft covering of the entozoa presents us also with the lowest form of that cyclo-vertebral element, which forms by its consolidation and repetition, a series of calcified rings or segments around the exterior of the trunk in higher entomoid articulata, and the solid bodies of the vertebrae in the red-blooded classes. In most of the inferior orders of entozoa there are numer- rous dense conical recurved hollow, and sharp pointed spines which are sometimes disposed as teeth around the mouth, and sometimes are found covering a great portion of the anterior part of the body, giving it the appearance of a file to abrade the surface on which they are to feed, or through which they have to force their way. These hollow spines are thus organs of progressive motion, like the cirrhi and setse of annelides. They are strongest and most numerous in the acanthocephalous species, where they cover the whole of the retractile proboscis, and sometimes, as in the echino- rhynchus hystrix, nearly the whole of the anterior surface of the body. There is thus a transition from these teeth-like organs in the interior of the mouth, and those covering the surface of the body in these soft worms which move through a fleshy resisting medium everywhere in contact with them, to the lateral spines of the annelides which can be moved with more freedom and more precision through a thin aquatic or aerial medium, as in the aquatic annelides and the earth-worms. The exterior covering is more dense in its texture, and consequently more articulated in its appearance in those parasitic worms, which are found attached to the exterior surface of the gills, the lips, the eyes, and other soft parts of fishes, and which have thence been called epizoa. We already find in many of these animals, as in the lerncea and chondrocanthi, not only the head forming a distinct segment of the body, and the trunk partially divided by transverse depressions, but numerous appendices already developed from the sides of these segments, and some of these appendices, especially on the head, provided with move- able articulation. This dense covering is still so transparent and hermogenous, that we can distinctly perceive through it, the longitudinal muscular fibres which produce the numerous corrugations of the skin, and also the contained viscera. The transition is quite imperceptible from these epizoa, as the tracheliastes and the achtheres to the fixed parasitic entomostracous crustaceous animals, as the ergasilus and the lamproglena, where the exterior covering has the same texture and properties, and where the articulated appearance of the trunk and its appendices is nearly in the same simple condition. One of these lowest of the entomoid tribes almost inseparable from the epizoa, the lamproglena pulchella, is represented in Fig, 10, B. where we already observe the head and three principal divisions of the thorax distinctly marked, as in insects. We perceive in this little animal, found attached to the gills of the cyprinus jeses, two pairs of maxillae, a, a, b, b, formed like curved pointed feet, and two pairs of antennae c, c, d, d, as in higher Crustacea. Above the mouth e, are seen the two eyes united on the median plain as in higher monoculi, and the intestinal canal, is observed surrounded by the follicles of the liver, and passing straight through the middle of the whole body, as in most parasitic and carniverous articulata. Pairs of feet are seen extending from the sides of the segments, and transverse fasciculi of muscular fibres i, h, k. The unimpregnated ovaries, closed above and filled with imperfectly developed ova which after- wards descend to external sacs, open on each side of the last distinct segment by a trilobate orifice m. All the ex- ternal parts of this very minute animal are developed nearly to the same extent, and articulated to as great a degree in the achtheres and several of the higher of the acknowledged epizoa ; so that we have already developed in the lowest of the helminthoid classes, the rudiments of all those character- istic parts of the complicated skeletons of insects, and of all the higher entomoid articulata. VII. Rotifera. The wheel animalcules are more closely allied to the helminthoid articulata than to any of the inferior radiated classes, especially in their supra and infra-sesopha- geal ganlia, their abdominal longitudinal nerves, their dorsal vessel for circulation, their lateral maxillae, their highly deve- loped genetal system, and their muscular activity. Their exterior covering, though generally thin and transparent as crystal, appears to possess considerable firmness from the numerous powerful muscles inserted into it, and from the transverse corrugations it presents when the body is drawn backwards to their fixed caudal extremity. Some- times it is in form of a sheath enveloping the middle of the body,and open both before and behind, to allow the head and tail to be retracted and pro- tected. This firm tough elastic covering of the roti- fera has some resemblance in its hermogenous texture to that of the entozoa, and pro- bably is persistent and en- larges with the body. There are no earthy deposits formed in any part of the body of these minute and active animals. The densest parts of their body appear to be the two jaws which move trans- versely by powerful muscles, and are generally provided with numerous sharp teeth. One of these wheel- animal- cules, termed hydatina senta, common in our ponds of fresh water, is represented in Fig. 1 1, where we perceive seventeen muscular lobes, a, a, for the movement of the vibratile cilia, disposed around the mouth. The muscular apparatus b, of the maxillae and the mouth are retracted by longitudinal muscles c, which pass obliquely backwards, and the whole body is forcibly retracted towards the fixed caudal extremity by several longitudinal bands d, of muscular fibres which extend the whole length of the body. The large central or supra-eesophageal ganglion o, is accompanied by four other ganglia, disposed around the oesophagus, and abdominal nervous filaments p, are perceptible, extending longitudinally on the inferior surface, as in other articulated classes. The muscular apparatus of the jaws may almost be regarded as analogous to the muscular stomach armed with teeth com- mon in Crustacea. The narrow part of the intestine considered as the oesophagus g, leads to a long and capacious digestive cavity, which in many of the genera of rotifera developes nu- merous caecal appendices, like the biliary follicles of annelides. In this capacious intestine, extending from ^, considered as the oesophagus to near the anus, i, on the dorsal part, we observe small animalcules, naviculce, h, which have been swallowed entire. The longitudinal dorsal vessel e, more like an abdominal nerve, as in other articulata, follows the median line, and gives off numerous lateral branches in its course. Two glandular sacs /, appear to pour their secretions into the muscular cavity of the mouth, as the liver into the muscular stomach of Crustacea, or the salivary sacs into the oesophagus of mollusca. The two ovaria m, form large lobed organs extending upwards on each side of the intestine, and open by one orifice into the cloaca, behind the rectum , and two long narrow glandular sacs k, k, considered as testes, pour their secretions into a large membranous vesicle situate behind the cloaca. The jaws of this animal are represented apart from the body, along with their enveloping muscular apparatus, in Fig. 12, where 1, , shows the serrated edges of the numerous teeth on each side of the open- ing of the mouth, 1, #, the muscular apparatus of the jaws, and 1, c, the general muscular sac of the mouth. One of the jaws is represented at 2, Fig. 12, separated from the muscular sac of the mouth, where the parallel teeth composing the jaw, so variable in number in the rotiferous animals, are seen at a, and the insertions of the muscles at b. Sometimes only a single tooth on each side is seen to compose the jaws, and they have been observed to vary in the number of component teeth in the jaws of different animals from one to six in each jaw. Thus their most solid parts relate solely to digestion, and the lightness of their exterior covering corresponds with the constant and rapid movements of these rotifera through their watery element. VIII. Cirrhopoda. The cirrhopods, like the entomostra- cous Crustacea, are articulated animals enclosed in shells like those of mollusca, so that they present both forms of the skeleton. They have six pairs of curled jointed mem- bers extending from each side of the body, from which this class has received its name. Each pair arises from a short thick fleshy peduncle, and the peduncle or haunch of the anterior shortest pair, those 011 each side of the mouth, support a pair of short, pyramidal, laminated, branchiae, like those attached to the haunches of the legs in most of the Crustacea. The feet are covered externally with a trans- parent, firm, elastic integument, are regularly and closely jointed to their finest extremity, and are furnished with minute jointed cirrhi disposed along each side of their inner concave surface. The trunk of the body between the feet is also partially jointed ; it presents the usual nervous columns and ganglia disposed along the ventral surface, as in other articulated classes ; and, as in them, the intestine passes straight from the mouth to the anus, which opens into a long thin flexible conical tube. The mouth of these ani- mals is furnished with an upper and a lower lip, with a pair of mandibles and a pair of maxillae. The maxillae are fur- nished with small fleshy palpi, and the lower lip is formed by the union of the exterior maxillae. The cirrhopods are almost always inclosed in multivalve shells secreted from the outer surface of a fleshy, thin enveloping mantle, and which are attached to submarine bodies either directly by their base, or by means of a fleshy tubular peduncle. These exterior shells are generally thin, laminated, dense, composed of carbonate of lime with animal matter, and grow by the successive addition of layers to their inner surface. The testaceous coverings are most developed in the balani, where the articulated members of the contained animal are least, and these exterior shells are least in the anatifa, and other pedunculated genera where the feet are largest. The acorn- shells, or balani, form a hollow cone composed of six pyra- midal pieces, ribbed longitudinally with tubular cavities, and overlopping each other in an imbricated manner by their thin margins. These strong pyramidal plates, striated in- ternally, both transversely and longitudinally, rest their broad bases on the margin of a circular fixed calcareous disk, striated in a radiated manner with small hollow tubes which open into those of the pyramidal plates. Between the su- perior separated apices of these larger plates, are interposed six smaller pyramidal pieces with their points directed downwards, so that their bases complete the upper free and smaller margin of this truncated hollow cone. The smaller inverted plates appear to be anchylosed to the larger inferior pieces. Within this fixed cone, which has the means of continued increase by its subdivision into numerous pieces, there are four moveable triangular plates, two larger and two smaller, which form an operculum to open and close at the will of the animal. In the anatifa or pentalasmis, represented in Fig. 13, we have an example of the ordinary form of the skeleton in the barnacles, or lepades, suspended by a fleshy peduncle. The shells here are thin and diapha- nous, and by their striated outer surface, they mark the limits of the successive layers of growth, and the opposite direc- tions in which these lay- FIG. 13. ers are extended in the two lateral pieces of the shell. Fig. 13,1, represents the entire shell with the jointed members of the animal projectingfrom the aperture, and a portion of the contracted pedun- cle. The jointed mem- bers , with their jointed cilia are here very long, and are seen partially extended from the open anterior aperture b, of the shell. The pedun- cle, is composed of a tough exterior coriaceous tunic, and an inner muscular coat, so that it is capable of rapidly contracting when alarmed. The dorsal shell e, is the only piece placed on the median plain, and grows by layers added to its inner surface and increasing successively from the proximal to the distal extremity. The larger lateral pieces, c, c, to which the animal is fixed by a strong transverse muscle of attachment, as in bivalved mollusca, grow likewise by layers extended from the whole of the distal margin, the centre of ossification being at the proximal point. The two distal smaller opercular pieces d, grow from their distal to- wards their proximal ends. From their greater extent of motion by means of their long fleshy peduncle, these le- pades do not require to possess external shells so strong as the fixed sessile balani. A dorsal view of the same shell on a more reduced scale is given in Fig. 1 3, 2, which represents the direction of the successive layers of growth of the dorsal plate , which is analogous to the whole complex cone of the balani, the four lateral moveable pieces representing the four valvular small pieces in the sessile species. In Fig. 13, 3, the tubular peduncle is divided to show its outer coriaceous covering k, and the inner muscular coat /, with the inter- posed skin i, and the right side of the shell is removed to show the inverted and curved position of the animal in its cavity. In some of the pedunculated cirrhopods, as the poUicipes, there are several small supplementary calcareous pieces placed at the junction of the peduncle with the base of the shell, and some, as the cineras, have only a cartilage- nous or membranous covering unconsolidated by calcareous pieces. The anterior part of the body (Fig. 13, 3, ,) of this enclosed animal, as in most other articulata, has less of the articulated appearance, less distinct segments than the pos- terior portion of the trunk, and the skin of that anterior part is here thin and membranous. The abdominal, or posterior portion of the body (Fig. 13, 3, b, c,) is that tapering articu- lated, and free part, from the sides of which the articulated cirrhated and pedunculated members project. The muscles by which the anterior bulbous part of the trunk is attached to the valves of the shell are seen at y, and the strong adductor muscle passing across from the right to the left valve, and by which they are firmly closed when the animal is alarmed, is seen at. The six thick muscular peduncles for supporting and moving the six pairs of long articulated members on each side are seen at b, c, and the branchiae at- tached to the anterior or smallest pair of these haunches are seen at h, h. The membranous conical long tube continued from the anus is seen extending from the shell at e. These articulated organs of the cirrhopods attached to the sides of the abdominal portion of the trunk are in constant move- ment during life, extending and retracting, like the branchial organs of the post-abdomen in the branchiopodous crus- tacea. IX. Annelida. The red-blooded worms lead us a stage higher in the development of the articulated skeleton, and especially in the organs of locomotion. Some, as the pleione and the halithea, have the exterior covering of the body still so soft and membranous, as scarcely to present an arti- culated appearance. Some, as the leech, have only the trunk of the body developed, and from the want of lateral setae and cirrhi for progressive motion, have the segments sur- rounding the body very short and numerous, and thereby possess great flexibility of the trunk. In the earth-worm, the segments of the trunk are larger and firmer, and each ring is provided with eight very small curved, conical, hollow, sharp pointed spines or setae, which are disposed on the sides of the segments in two upper and two lower pairs. These setse are surrounded each with a muscular sheath for their advancement and retraction, and they serve as organs of locomotion. In some annelides the setee are hooked at their points, in others they are compressed, or spatulate, and in others subulate. In the simplest forms of annelides we sometimes find, as in the nais, but one long filament or seta developed from each side of each segment, which however still materially assists them in moving over a solid surface, or through narrow passages, or in their serpentine motions through the water. The softness of the skin in most of the annelides compensates for the want of articulated feet, by allowing greater flexibility to the trunk, and the delicate sensibility of the whole skin compensates for the imperfect development of their organs of sense. This delicate and unprotected condition of their outer surface requires many of them to shield their whole body in external solid adven- titious tubes, often most artfully constructed, and some, as the serpuke exude a calcareous conical tube from the surface of their skin, which enlarges like the conical shell of a gas- teropod, by the successive addition of new and wider cones to its interior surface. But the true skeleton of these arti- culated worms, as in the higher entomoid classes, is their exterior skin and epidermic covering, to which the muscles of locomotion are attached, whether this part be hard or soft. The upper lateral setae of the annelides appear to be the analogues of the wings of insects, and other corresponding parts extending from the sides of the segments in higher classes. When the setae of the annelides are hollow and jointed, or sub-articulate, they are commoiily called cirrhi, as we see in the long jointed cirrhi accompanying the tufts of setae on the sides of the nereides. One of the most articulated forms of the body and members presented by this class is seen in the sea-centiped, the nereis nuntia, re- presented in Fig. 14, where a dorsal view of the entire ani- mal is given at 1, a transverse section of a single segment at 2, and a magnified view of one of the lateral organs of mo- tion at 3. We already find in this worm FIG . 14. the head (Fig. 14. l,a, b) distinct from the trunk, and consisting of several separate and moveable segments. The head is provided with sharp, curved pointed maxillae, with ser- rated inner edges. There are numerous se- parate small simple eyes, or ocelli, disposed chiefly in transverse rows, and there are se- veral lateral tentacular filaments having the character of antennae. There is an enlarged anterior part of the trunk (Fig. 14, 1, b, e,) corresponding with the thorax of insects, and the segments are nearly equally develop- ed from this point to the posterior end of the trunk. All the segments of the head and trunk are still moveable on each other ; they are almost equally developed and equally provided with lateral appendices. In the transverse view of one of the segments (Fig. 14, 2,) of this nereis, we observe the lateral appendices to consist, on each side, of a long jointed slender tubular cirrhus (Fig. 14, c, d,) and a fasciculus of shorter setse placed below. This lateral organ of motion is seen on a more magnified scale in Fig. 14.3, where a re- presents the jointed cirrhus, and b,c the tuft of setae. These segments and their appendices vary much in their degree of consolidation, in some being soft and transparent, and in others opaque dense and covered with pearly or metaUic lustre. The tubicolous annelides which form the densest exterior tubes have generally the segments less marked, and covered with a softer skin than those which are found in soft tubes, or are en- tirely without such protection. We have thus already developed in the annelides, the segments of the body and their jointed tubular appendices for progressive motion, and all the essential parts of the skeleton which present themselves under various forms throughout the entomoid classes. X. Myriapoda. In the myriapods the skeleton is more dense, the articula- tions are more distinct, and the jointed tubular appendices, for progressive mo- tion, are more developed from the sides of the segments than in the helminthoid classes. Their muscles having firmer points of attachment, act with more energy and effect, and their movements effected in the thinner medium of the air are more lively than those of the hel- minthoid animals which mostly inhabit a more dense aquatic medium. The seg- ments of the body are here more numer- ous thanin the higher articulated classes, and they are still, as in the annelides, nearly equally developed throughout the whole trunk. In some, as the iuli, the segments are calcareous, hard, and cylin- drical, and the lateral appendices or feet are short, and for the most part double on each side of each segment. In other myriapods, as the scolopendra, repre- sented in Fig. 15, the segments are de- pressed, coriaceous, composed simply of an upper and a lower arched plate, attached by a softer flexible portion of the skin upon the two sides, and generally each segment presents but one pair of extremities more lengthened than in the iuli. The first pair of feet are here in form of simple curved perforated hooks placed at the sides of the mouth, and the succeeding feet along the whole sides of the trunk terminate in a single sharp conical claw less curved, with a very minute oppo sable spine extending from the interior of each terminal joint. The antennae (Fig. 1 5, c, c) are two in number, as in insects, and for the most part long, filiform, and multi-articulate, and the organs of vision generally consist of numerous simple eyes placed in a group behind the bases of the antennae. In the cylindrical vermiform chilognatha, the mandibles appear to be still destitute of palpi, which are developed on the mandibles of the larger chilopoda. The segments of the head, thorax, and abdomen are scarcely yet distinguishable from each other. The stigmata for respiration open on the sides of the alternate rings of the trunk, as if these were equivalent to only a half of the ordinary rings or segments of insects. The two last pairs of feet (Fig J 5.e, e) generally extend backwards in form of a bifid tail: they are for the most part longer than the other feet, and sometimes form foliated expansions at their free extremi- ties, as we likewise often see in the Crustacea. The segments of the trunk lie over each other in an imbricated manner at their line of junction, so as to defend the internal soft parts during the bending serpentine motions of the body. These animals do not undergo metamorphoses like insects, nor ac- quire wings, but the number of their segments varies with their period of growth ; and from the density of their exter- nal coverings, their unorganized nature, and their enveloping tubular forms, they are exuviable, like the dense skeletons of all the articulated tribes with articulated members. XI. Insect a. The skeleton of insects, from its super- ficial position, and from the lightness and density of its materials, is well adapted for intevertebrated animals destined for an aerial life. It is composed, in its densest parts, of a thin epidermic layer, a colouring matter often presenting the most lively hues, and a brilliant metallic lustre, and a thicker internal layer much resembling the woody fibres of plants, but composed of peculiar animal substances, termed chitine and coccine, and consolidated by small proportions of the phosphates of lime, magnesia, and iron. As in other entomoid classes, the trunk is surrounded with hollow rings or segments, which on the anterior parts of the body support lateral appendices ap- propriated to sensation, mastication, or progressive mo- tion ; and consequently, on these anterior portions of the body, the segments are more consolidated and more firmly united together than in the flexible and capacious pos- terior part. There are generally thirteen segments dis- tinguishable in the trunk of insects, of which the anterior forms the head, the next three the thorax, and the posterior nine the abdomen. The annexed diagram from Carus shows the form and position of these parts of the skeleton viewed from be- hind in the calosoma sycophanta, (Fig. 16.) a coleopterous in- sect. The body of insects generally tapers more or less at both ends, and the terminal segments before and behind are those least developed ; those composing the head indeed are so small, indistinct, and anchylosed together, that entomologists are not agreed as to their number, some considering this part as composed of one segment, some of three, and others of seven segments consolidated together. The head, (Fig. 1 6. g,) supports the organs of mastication and of the senses, and contains internally the parts of the mouth, the pharynx, the commencement of the oesophagus, and the two first pairs of ganglia. We observe attached to the head an inferior lip, or labiumand a superior lip or labrum, both of which extend transversely across the axis of the body, a pair of mandibles without palpi, and a pair of maxillae pro- vided with these jointed organs of sense. The head supports also a single pair of articulated antenna (Fig. 1 6. e,) most variable in form, a lingua, and a pair of eyes (Fig. 16.) generally compound, with three simple ocelli. The thorax supports the legs arid the wings, and is composed of three segments, the anterior of which (Fig. 16. h } ) is termed prothorax, the second mesothorax (Fig. 16, m,) and the third metathorax (Fig. 16. o.) The pro- thorax supports the first pair of legs, the mesothorax the second pair of legs, and the first pair of wings, and the metathorax has attached to it the third pair of legs, and the second pair of wings. These segments of the thorax, like vertebrae, are composed of several ele- ments which send processes inwards for the attachment of muscles, and the protection of the contained organs, and each of the segments exhibits a development pro- portioned to that of the parts it supports or contains. The parts of the legs have received names taken from those of the locomotive organs of vertebrata. Each leg is attached to its corresponding segment by a short, round, moveable articulation, called the coxa, or haunch (Fig. 16. m ; ) to this succeeds the trochanter (Fig. 16, i,) which is likewise a very short joint, and less moveable. The femur (Fig. 16. &,) is a strong and lengthened ar- ticulation, commonly extended horizontally, and the tibia (/,) which succeeds it is generally the most lengthened and slender joint of the leg, and directed vertically. The little joints of the tarsus (Fig. 16. A, B, C,) which follow, compose the foot which commonly terminates with simple crooked ungues or opposeable chili. The segments of the abdomen, commonly divided into an upper and a lower piece connected together at the sides by an unconsolidated portion of the integument, encompass the digestive and the generative organs, which for the most part terminate in the last segment. Each of the abdominal and thoracic segments is perforated on each side by a small spiracle or stigma which leads into the respiratory tracheae ramified through every part of the body. The wings and the legs are the parts most subject to variations of form and magnitude, and their variations are accompanied with corresponding differences in the relative development of the thoracic segments which lodge the muscles and nerves of these locomotive organs. In insects where the exterior or first pair of wings are little used in progression, as in most of the coleoptera, the mesothorax is small, and the other two segments, the anterior and posterior, are large ; but in dipterous insects, where the anterior or first pair of wings are alone developed, the mesothorax has assumed a pro- portionally great development, and the pro- and meta- thorax are very small. In the hymenoptera, the meso- thorax is large, in the hemiptera and orthoptera, the anterior segment is most developed, and in the neurop- terous insects, the meso- and the meta-thorax are large compared with the anterior thoracic segment. The meso- thorax is commonly the most important segment of this region of the body, and that which best shows its com- ponent elementary pieces. We observe four elements on its tergum or dorsal surface, arranged in a single lon- gitudinal series, the anterior of which is the prse-scutum ; then follow the scutum, the scutellum, and the post- scutellum. On the anterior aspect, or pectus, of the same segment^ are seen the sternum single on the median plain, and arranged in pairs on its sides, the paraptera, the epis- ternum, and the epimera. These tegumentary parts, form- ing the skeleton of insects, are thrown off about five times during the larva state, and once from the chry- salis before the animals assume their perfect adult form. XII. Arachnida. In those air-breathing entomoid ani- mals, without metamorphosis, without wings, without an- tennae, and with generally more than three pairs of legs, which compose the class of aracknida, we observe a more concentrated form of the segments, and a more consolid- ated condition of the skeleton on the anterior portion of the trunk than in the lower articulated classes. The seg- ments of the head are anchylosed to those of the thorax, so as to form a single division^ the cephalo-thorax, which supports the organs of the senses, those of mastication, and those of locomotion. The posterior division of the trunk is the abdomen. In place of the long jointed antennee on the anterior part of the head which we see in other entomoid classes, there are generally a pair of lateral pincers, or cheli, or a pair of flat and sharp-pointed piercing in- struments at the sides of the head more suited to their retired, cunning, watchful and carniverous habits. Their mouth is provided with a labrum, a labium, a pair of man- dibles, a pair of maxillae, and a pair of jointed palpi, often extended like short feet. The general disposition and form of the external parts in the animals of this class are seen in this outline of the lycosa tarentula, (Fig. 17-) where a represents the cephalothorax, and b the abdominal portion of the trunk. The eyes are simple small isolated ocelli, placed on the upper and anterior portion of the cephalotho- rax, and varying in number from two to twelve ; they are of very different sizes in the same animal, and variously dis- posed in the differ- ent species. Four large eyes are seen at d, placed as at the angles of a square, and four smaller eyes are seen behind them at d, arranged in a single transverse row. The long jointed palpi, at- tached to the maxillae are seen at c, c, extended like feet. In the four pairs of legs attached to the sides of the cephalothorax, we observe the long femur, extending as in insects, from the trochanter e ; but we commonly lind a smaller articulation or protibia interposed between the femur and the tibial joint. In some there are only six legs, as in insects. On the lower and anterior por- tion of the abdomen, or sometimes on the posterior and lower part of the cephalothorax, are placed the open- ings into the; respiratory organs, which spiracula are found to vary in number from two to eight, they sometimes lead to pectinated simple air-sacs, and some- times they open into extended and ramified tracheae. Although these animals retain the form with which they escaped from the ovum, they throw off periodically their exterior covering, like the larvae of insects ; and like the Crustacea, they reproduce entire legs when they have been removed from the body. The last abdominal seg- ment of the scorpion is in form of a sting, or ossified tubular poison-duct, as we frequently see that segment in insects. XIII. Crustacea. The crustaceous animals possess the most solid form of the skeleton met with in the arti- culated classes. It is found in the larger decapods to contain nearly half its weight of carbonate of lime, and there is also a considerable proportion of phosphate of lime, with traces of magnesia, iron, and soda. These sub- stances are exuded from the surface of the true skin, along with a tough coagulable animal gluten, which con- nects all their particles, and forms a thin varnish on the surface. The colouring matter is generally beneath this varnish, and on the exterior surface of the calcareous de- posit, but sometimes it pervades the whole substance of the shell. This extravascular crust forms hollow rings to envelope the trunk, and tubular sheaths to cover its appendices, and these are periodically cast off and renewed on the whole exterior of the body, to allow of the necessary growth of the soft parts. The head and thorax are here commonly united to form, as in arachnida, a cephalo- thorax, which is covered above by a large continuous arched plate, or carapace, and supports the usual appen- dices for mastication, sensation, and locomotion. There are two strong mandibles, with their palpi attached to them, at the sides of the mouth ; two pairs of slender maxilke, also provided with palpi ; and exterior to these there are three pairs of larger convertible maxillae, or feet- jaws, with their attached jointed palpi, as seen in the larger decapods, as in the astacus fluviatilis, represented in Fig. 18. There are two pairs of antennae, the inner pair (, a,) of which are commonly divided at their free ex- tremities, and the exterior larger pair (b, b,) have at their proximal extremity, in their broad expanded basilar joint, the small circular prominent opening of the vestibule or ear, on each side, directed downwards, sometimes co- vered with a membrane, and sometimes with a calcined plate. The eyes (c, c,) are compound, generally pedun- culated and moveable, some- times fixed or sessile. The upper and anterior part of the cephalo-thorax is occupied by the stomach ( e, ) with its strong muscular and osseous apparatus, and containing five teeth. In the middle of the posterior part of the ce- phalothorax is seen the pro- jecting portion which covers the heart (/). Towards the sides are seen the two curved longitudinal lines on the carapace, which mark the internal attachment of the mem- branous diaphragm, which separates the respiratory cavities on the sides from the abdominal viscera contained in the middle portion of the cephalothorax. The anchylosed segments of the cephalothorax send inwards and upwards numerous vertical thin calcified plates, which give attach- ment to the muscles of the haunches, and by meeting above, they form an inferior median canal to protect the nerves and ganglia of this part of the trunk. There are most frequently five pairs of legs, which like the exte- rior pairs of jaws, have branchiae attached to their bases. In the female of the decapods, we observe the round opening of the vulva in each haunch of the middle or third pair of legs ; and in the male the open sheath of the penis is seen in each haunch of the fifth or posterior pair of legs. The front pair of legs are generally the most powerful, and have the last tarsal joint inserted high, and opposable to the penultimate articulation (k, k). The segments of the post-abdomen (m, n,) are moveable, and sometimes extend backwards in a line with the cephalo- thorax, or are short, and fold in beneath that part. Below the middle of the last small segment, is the opening of the anus, and the two last segments of the post abdo- men have their lateral appendices (p, o,) in form of flat expanded caudal plates for swimming and for protecting, when folded inwards, the delicate inferior parts of the trunk, or the ova in the female. On the lower surface of the post-abdominal segments are attached the false feet, to which the ova are affixed after their discharge from the two ovaries, and from which the branchiae are commonly suspended in the inferior orders of Crustacea. The chief differences in the skeletons of this class arise from the size, and the forms assumed by the convertible lateral appendices of the segments, and the extent to which the segments are developed or anchylosed. This solid crust, forming the skeleton of Crustacea, is thrown off periodically from every part of the trunk and even its most delicate appendices. This is done by the animal first de- taching the cutis and muscles from the inner surface of the old shell, then excreting from the surface of the cutis a new layer of epidermis, then a deposit of colouring matter, and within this the calcareous materials of the new shell, the old having been broken off in detached pieces in succession from all parts of the body. THE external skeletons of the molluscous animals are consolidated by the carbonate of lime, without the phos- phate which is common in the other great divisions of the animal kingdom. This earthy matter is secreted from the skin in successive layers mixed Avith a glutinous co- agulable animal matter, which gives firmness and tenacity to the whole mass, and the skeletons are not exuviable, as in the other articulated classes. From the low condi- tion of all the organs of relation in the molluscous ani- mals, they are less able to perceive, or avert, or escape from danger than the free and active articulata, and they accumulate and preserve the successive layers of their rocky covering permanently in contact with their surface. The sheUs of these animals are remarkable for their want of symmetry on the two sides of the body, the want of unity in their plan of formation, and their inconstancy in animals of similar structure. XIV. Tunicata. The tunicated animals have no external shell nor internal solid parts, but are covered with a tough elastic homogeneous tunic, in form of an enveloping sac, with a respiratory and an anal orifice. This exterior sac is the analogue of the valves of conchifera, and has the muscular fibres of the lining mantle inserted into its inner surface, as in the shells of bivalvia. It presents every variety of colour and consistence in the different species, and has often a coating of extraneous particles of shells or gravel adhering to its outer surface. Some- times it extends at its lower part into numerous short processes, or into a long peduncle to attach the body to rock or other hard substances. This exterior cartilaginous skeleton is most dense, thick, and opaque in the larger isolated forms of ascidise, and is most soft, delicate and transparent in the aggregated or compound forms of tuni- cata. Two very dissimilar kinds of tunicated animals are represented in Fig. 19, where 1, is the cynthia papillata, and 2, the pyrosoma gigantium ; the first is permanently fixed, like most of the animals of this class, FIG. 19. and the second is an aggregate mass of nu- merous individuals which floats by their com- bined movements freely through the sea. In the cynthia we observe the transparent tough cartilaginous tunic forming a sac, which is entirely closed except at the respiratory orifice (,) which admits the currents of water brought by the vibratile cilia of the gills, and the vent (,) by which the currents escape from the respiratory cavity. The lining muscular tunic of the mantle is most firmly united to the sac around these two orifices, where there are also distinct sphincter muscles. At the bottom of the sac is seen the stomach (c,) the great branchial vein (d,) which dilates below the stomach to form a heart, the convoluted intestine (e,) the ovary (f y ) and the liver (#,) enveloping the pyloric end of the stomach. The pyrosoma, Fig. 19. 2, is a long tube closed at the upper end (a,) open at the lower extremity (#,) and composed of innumerable distinct in- dividuals (c, ,) which are similarly organized internally to the cynthia, but have their respiratory orifices on the sides of the long projecting external papillae (c, c,) and the vents or anal orifices of all the separate individuals open- ing into the interior of the tube ; so that by the act of respiration alone, this transparent and luminous tube is carried up through the still seas. The exterior tunics of these component animals are thin, soft, transparent, and of a bluish white colour, and are the only parts by which they appear to be united together. In some of the com- pound forms of these tunicata, however, the enveloping tunic has a third opening, which admits the currents of respiration or circulation to extend from one individual to another. XV. Conchifera. The shells of these animals consistgenerally of two moveable pieces or valves placed on the exterior of the body, and connected together by ligaments and muscles. These valves are composed of carbonate of lime mixed with an albuminous coagulable matter, which is secreted chiefly by the glandular pores on the exterior surface of the lining mantle. The valves grow by the successive addition of larger layers to their inner surface, and the limits of these superadded laminae are commonly marked by distinct striae on the outer surface of the shells. As the calcareous laminae are cast upon the surface of the mantle which envelopes all the soft parts of the body, the shells vary in their form ac- cording to the shape of the enclosed animal, and es- pecially of the secreting glandular portion of their lining membrane. The exterior surface of the valves is covered with a thin layer of the same albuminous matter which unites the particles of the shell : this forms a dense and tough varnish or epidermis, which protects the colouring matter immediately beneath it, and the whole texture of the solid layers. Although most of the conchifera are bivalved, some, as the pholades, possess small sup- plementary pieces at the hinge of the valves, and are thence called multivalves. The relations of these cal- careous shells to the parts of the enclosed animal will be perceived by the annexed sketch of the common muscle, mytilus edulis, Fig. 20, where the soft parts are repre- sented as attached to the right valve (0,) and the left valve (by) is opened and folded upwards. The ligament (c,) connects the two valves together, and tends by its elasticity to open them to a limited extent. The liga- ment of bivalvia grows like the shell by successive in- ternal layers, and is placed at the hinge, where there are generally processes of the shell termed teeth, which lock into each other when the valves are closed. The position of the stomach (d,) with the short oesophagus, and the two pairs of long labial tentacula (e 9 ) mark the anterior part of the shell. The muscular foot extends from the ventral surface of the body, where we see also the byssus (g,) by which the delicate mytiloid shells are fixed to solid bodies. The respiratory orifice is placed at the most open part of the shell, and near this is the vent (i,) by which the respired water and the excretions are discharged. The rectum opens near to the vent after perforating the ventricle of the heart. The large lobes of the liver envelope the turns of the intestine, and the pyloric portion of the stomach . On the ventral or inferior surface of the abdomen, is the respiratory cavity in which are seen the four long pectinated laminae of the gills (m,) and towards the posterior part of the shell is the strong adductor muscle (n,) by which the valves are drawn forcibly together when the animal is alarmed. The ovary (o,) fills a great portion of the posterior and upper part of the shell. From this position of the soft parts within the valves, we perceive the anterior part (d 9 ) of the shell to be that next the mouth (e,) and the posterior part (b,) to be that next to the anus (&,) and the vent. The dorsal margin (a,) of the valves is that next to the liver and ovary, and the ventral part is that which encloses the respiratory gills (m) ; we also observe from these parts the reason for designating the one valve (,) the right, and the other (b,) the left, as we term the lateral parts of the skeleton in higher animals. As these shells of conchifera are extravascular exudations from the surface of the mantle, they are incapable of growth but by su- perposition of new parts, and the various spines and lamince, which are so often developed on their exterior surface are mere depositions from the edge of the mantle, and indicate former positions of the margin of the valves. The ordinary direction in which these processes of the shells are formed is seen in the long narrow projecting laminae of the spondylus gcederopus, (Fig. 21. 1 .) where they are arranged, with great symmetry, in rows which are regular both in the longitudinal and transverse direc- tions, and indicate the positions of the processes of the mantle which excreted them. The adductor muscle of the valves leaves a depression on the inner surface of each, which marks its place of insertion and its form, and which is termed the muscular impression. When the shells have a short and round form, as the spon- dylus, (Fig. 21. 1.) the anomia, (Fig. 21. 2.) the ostrea, there is commonly but one adductor muscle, and one muscular im- pression, and these are monomyaria ; when the valves have a more lengthened form, as the area, (Fig. 21. 3.) the tellina, and many others, there are at least two muscles and two muscular impressions, and these form the dimyaria. The hinge of the valves is supported by the ligament, and formed by the teeth which afford the most obvious, regular and constant characters for the discrimination of these shells. The teeth are seen in the figure of the area barbata, (Fig. 21. 3. #,) projecting from the whole extent of the hinge, and the two muscular im- pressions are seen in the interior towards the ends of the valves. The epidermic filaments which give a barbed appearance to the surface of this and many other shells, are merely uncalcified marginal projections of the albumi- nous matter which pervades all the successive layers of the valves. In the anomia, (Fig. 2 1 . 2, and 2*,) there is a circular perforation (a,) in the flat valve, through which the central portion of the adductor muscle passes to be inserted into a third small circular calcareous piece, which is perma- nently fixed to some extraneous solid body. The pe- riphery of the adductor muscle is inserted into the flat valve around the margin of the hole ; so that the muscle here secretes the calcareous matter of the small fixed opercular piece into which it is inserted, as the muscular foot of a gasteropod secretes the calcareous operculum which covers the orifice of its shell. There is a great difference in the extent to which the right and left valves resemble or differ from each other. Some are equivalve, or have their two valves alike in form, as the cardium, the mactra, the solen, the pholas ; some, as the tridacna, are sub-equivalve, or have them nearly alike ; and others as the anomia, the terebratula, the gryphcea, are inequivalve, or have the valves very unlike each other. The waved disposition of the calcareous particles in the layers of these shells, often gives them a beautiful nacreous lustre, especially in the more pellucid internal layers, which constitutes the mother-of-pearl; and when spherical glo- bules of this matter, composed of concentric layers en- veloping some extraneous particle, are secreted by the mantle and unconnected with the shell, they form the rich pearls of commerce. The edge of the mantle sometimes extends itself beyond the margin of the valves, so as to touch some extraneous body, and by their exuding the usual calcareous and albuminous matter, it causes the con- tiguous surfaces to become cemented together ; in this manner the oyster glues its shell immovably to the rocks at the bottom of the sea. XVI. Gasteropoda. The shells of the gasteropods are composed, like other molluscous shells, of carbonate of lime with animal matter. They are extravascular, and generally ex- creted from the outer surface of the skin in the form of hol- low unilocular laminated cones, which envelope the exterior of the animal, and they grow by the addition of successive layers to their inner surface. They take the form of the exterior of the body, especially of the mantle, and they are perma- nently connected with the muscular system. The laminae which compose these shells have generally a fibrous struc- ture, and the parallel fibres which form them have a zig- zag direction nearly vertical to the surfaces of the layers. They are generally covered with a thin epidermic varnish, which protects the colouring matter of the surface ; their outer layers are commonly more loose, opaque and porous than the dense, pellucid, glassy layers of the interior, and they are often provided with an operculum which is some- times horny, sometimes calcareous, and is permanently attached to the muscular foot which secretes it. Many gasteropods have no shell, as the scyllaea, the tritonia, and the doris ; some have a thin calcareous lamina within the skin of the back, as the aplysia, and some have an ex- ternal shell so small as to cover only a portion of the animal's surface, as the testacella, the cryptostoma and the carinaria. The shell is perforated in the haliotis the fissu- rella and the emarginula, and it is composed of eight trans- verse parallel imbricated pieces in the chiton. It is however most generally in form of a hollow cone, wide and open at the base, closed at the apex, and more or less convoluted or spiral. This cone has been considered as analogous to the two valves of the conchifera united together. It is short, wide, and nearly straight in the patella, more length- ened, narrow, and slightly bent in the dentalium, a little twisted in the crepidula, the haliotis, and the capulus, and it revolves round its apex in a single plane in the planorbis and some of the helices, forming a flat disk like an ammonite. In most of the gasteropodous shells, the plane of revolution is constantly changing during growth, so as to cause the cone to turn to the right side, and to revolve in a spiral manner round an axis or pillar called the columella of the shell. This spiral twist appears to be the result of the descent of the foot over the columella, and the influence of the great centres of the circulating and respiratory systems on the left side of the body ; so that the apex of the spire is on the right side of the animal, and the canal of the shell for respiration is on its left side. In a few reverse shells, where the spire lies to the left side of the aperture, the circulating and respiratory organs are found transposed to the right side of the animal. The general disposition of the soft parts in the cavity of a spiral unilocular univalve shell will be seen by this diagram of the common buccinum undatwn, Fig. 22, where the animal is represented as creeping upon its ex- panded foot. The upper and back part of the foot supports the operculum (m,) which closes up the aperture of the shell when the ani- mal is retracted. The adductor muscle (b,) is at- tached to the columella, and is the only part of the body adhering to the shell. The mantle is open in front, lines the aperture of the shell, secretes the calcareous layers, and covers the respiratory organs (g.) The muscular funnel (i,) extends through the canal on the left side of the aper- ture of the shell, and leads the currents to the two branchiae (g,) at the base of which are the auricle and the ventricle (h.) On the right side, within the mantle, is seen the anal orifice (,) and the male organ (/.) The head, provided with two fleshy tentacula, with little black eyes at their base, is extended from a short muscular neck, and projects from the mouth a long powerful proboscis, furnished at its ex- tremity with sharp recurved conical horny teeth (e.) The closed and tapering part of the shell is occupied by the turns of the liver and testicle in the male, or the liver and ovary of the female, which organs accompany each other to the apex of the spine. When the animal creeps forwards, covered with its shell, it extends its foot, its head and its neck from the aperture in such a mariner that the upper lip of the shell lies over the free edge of the mantle above the head, and the foot extends over the lower lip, or the columella. The columella, or pillar, is the axis of revolution, and is sometimes perforated through its interior with a cavity called the umbilicus, which has no communication with the cavity of the cone contain- ing the animal, but tends to lighten massive shells, where the wide revolutions are at a distance from each other. As the calcareous layers of the shell are chiefly secreted and formed by the anterior glandular portion of the mantle, which is a part most liable to vary in its form according to the age and the season, the chief differences in gasteropodous shells are those produced by the diver- sified forms of the upper lip. In the young animals the upper lip of the shell is generally quite even and smooth, and corresponds with the simple condition of the margin of the mantle, but at maturity this upper secreting portion of the mantle often assumes a highly deve- loped, folded, or fimbriated edge, and the upper lip of the shell takes a similar form. In the young strombus gigas, the upper lip is quite even and uniform with the ordinary turns of the cone, but at maturity it expands, thickens, folds backwards, and becomes eifuse. The shell of the pterocera scorpio, in its young state, (Fig. 23. 3,) has the ordinary simple thin, incurvated margin of other growing shells ; the canal, (Fig. 23. 3. &,) appears short and truncated, and the apex of the spire (Fig. 23. 3. ,) pro- jects, naked and acute, from the opposite end of the shell. But as it ap- proaches maturity, (Fig. 23. 4,) the upper lip ex- pands, becomes effuse, extends to the right and to the left side, so as to conceal the apex of the spire, (Fig. 23. 4. a,) and lengthen the canal (Fig. 23. 4. ,) and it shoots upwards several processes which are at first thin and hollow open canals, (Fig. 23. U c,) and are gradually filled up with successive layers, and converted into solid spines, which entirely change the appearance of the shell. These changes of the upper lip take place periodically, and at regular intervals during the development of many shells, as in the murices, thus producing transverse rows of variously formed processes from the outer surface of all the turns of the cone. The young and the adult shells of the cypraa are scarcely recognisable as belonging to the same individual, from the changes of form they experience at maturity. The form of the young shell of the cypraa exanthema is represented in Fig. 23. 2, where the aperture is wide, the upper lip thin and even, the canal (b) projecting, and the apex (a) of the spire extended and free. But in the adult form (Fig. 23. 1,) of the same shell the aperture is contracted, narrow and serrated, the upper lip is thickened and rounded backwards, the canal is converted into a groove, and the whole of the spire is covered and concealed. These adult changes in the cypraea are produced by the extension of the sides of the mantle over the upper and lower lips of the shell, and now the new layers are added to the exterior surface, as if it were an internal shell, and the line of junction of the two enveloping folds of the mantle is marked by a trans- verse discoloration or groove on the exterior of the shell along the whole of its convex dorsal part. By this ad- dition of new layers to its whole exterior surface, the adult cyprsea has a smooth, glistening, naked and variously coloured exterior, like the interior surface of most other shells, and can present no rough epidemic covering when arrived at that state. In the cypraea, the dolium, the harpaand many others, the interior surface of the shell has experienced no change by being long in contact with the living soft parts of the contained animal ; the grooves, the striae, the prominences, and even the colouring mat- ters which were upon the outer exposed surface in the young condition of the shell, still preserve in the adult state, their primitive appearance and integrity throughout the whole interior of the revolutions. These have grown by the revolution of the upper lip around the columella ; but many others add new layers also to the inferior or columellar lip during their growth, thus covering over the superficial external layers on the left side of the revolutions, and generally presenting strong parietes and a thick and solid columella, as in the strombus gig as. In many forms, however, as in the cones and olives, where the widely expanded upper lip sufficiently covers and protects the smaller revolutions, the total weight of the shell is diminished without weakening its exposed part by carrying forward the calcareous matter from the inner first formed concealed revolutions, and depositing it upon the exterior surface of the last or outer turn of the shell which alone is exposed to danger from external causes. The vertical, zig-zag, parallel fibres composing the thick parietes of these shells is distinctly preserved in their fossilized re- mains. The hybernating gasteropods, as the snails, which want an operculum, close up the aperture of their shell, when they retire to their winter slumber, with a thick deposit of calcareous matter, called an cpiphragma, which is not connected with the muscular foot, like the true operculum of other shells, but only with the aperture of the cone. The operculum is a permanent part attached to the contained animal, and the epiphragrna is a de- ciduous part attached only to the orifice of the shell. XVII. Pteropoda. As the pteropodous animals are not provided with a muscular foot to creep upon a solid sur- face, but are all organized to swim freely through the sea by means of muscular expansions like fins, they are never encumbered with a massive or heavy skeleton. Their skeleton, when present, is generally external, extra- vascular, thin, pellucid, horny, or vitreous ; it is univalve, unilocular. of various forms, generally without a spiral twist, capable of enveloping the whole body, and it is destitute of an operculum, as in most of the light shelled floating gasteropods, and the swimming testaceous cephalopods. The annexed figure of the cymbulia of Peron (Fig. 24,) represents a typical form of a testaceous pteropod from the Mediterranean, as swimming with its expanded fins which support the branchiae, and covered below with its thin, lengthened, fusiform, carinated and serrated shell (b.) The up- per part of its body (c) between its muscular and highly vascular fins (a, a,) appears to present two tentacula, two eyes, and an ex- tended proboscis. The thin dia- phanous, conical shell of the spiratella is twisted spirally on itself, and with its apex on the left side, like a turrilite ; the delicate pellucid shell of the hyalea enveloping the round body of the animal is tricuspid below ; in the shell of the cuvieria columnella there is a partially formed chamber at the lower closed extremity ; and in the creseis virgula the shell has a long, straight, conical form, common to the belemnites, baculites, orthoceratites, and many other extinct cephalopods. XVIII. Cephalopoda. In this highest of the mollus- cous, and of all the invertebrated classes, we trace the gradual disappearance of the external unorganized shells of the hiv r ertebrated tribes, and the commencement of the internal organized bones of the vertebrata. The shells are sometimes external, as in the nautilus, and sometimes internal, as in the sepia, and they are consolidated by the carbonate of lime, as in the lower molluscous classes. They are almost always polythalamous, and without an operculum. Many of the extinct shells have the form of straight cones, as belemnites, baculites, and orthoceratites ; some are curved, as hamites and scaphites, some are con- voluted and orbicular, as the spirula, the nautilus, and the ammonites, and some, as the turrulites, are spirally twisted, like the lurbinated shells of gasteropods. The several chambers of these polythalamous cones communi- cate with each other, sometimes by means of a prolonged calcareous syphon, as in the spirula and nautilus, some- times by one or more simple foramina in the partitions. As the cephalopods do not creep upon a muscular foot, like the slow-moving gasteropods, but for the most part swim freely through the sea, their shells are thin and light, and sometimes xconsist of simple straight laminae unconsolidated by calcareous matter. The form and struc- ture of the external polythalamous shells of the cepha- lopods is seen in the section of the nautilus pompilius, represented in Fig. 25. 2, where (0,) shows the interior of the last formed chamber, in which the animal is fixed by two muscles of attachment. The syphons by which all the posterior chambers (c,) communicate with each other, are seen to extend for a short distance, tapering from before back- wards, into each of the succeeding chambers. These separated partitions and chambers of this convoluted cone have nearly the same relations to each other and to the contained ani- mal, as the successive contiguous layers of the convoluted shell of a gasteropod, and they are formed in the same manner by periodical exuda- tions of calcareous matter from the exterior surface of the mantle. In the spirula., the long calcareous syphon of each septum extends through the whole of the chamber, and into the commencement of the next succeeding syphon ; so that there is a continuous calcareous tube passing through the whole shell on the inner concave side of its convolutions. The shell of the sepia, (Fig. 25. 1. 0,) affords an example of an internal shell belonging to this class. It is contained within the substance of the dorsal part of the mantle, and consists of numerous nearly flat layers, placed within each other, the first formed being at the outer part and posterior termi- nation of the shell, and the succeeding new layers ex- tending always more forwards than the edges of the old. These compressed layers are connected together by in- numerable, very mimits tubular fibres ; so that there is a great analogy between the structure of this internal laminated shell, and the external polythalamous shells, where the successive laminae are more detached. In the figure of the sepia (Fig. 25. 1,) the mantle has been cut open at (,) to show the position and the successive lay- ers of the shell. The lateral muscular fins (#,) by which the animal swims, extend along the whole sides of the abdomen, the funnel (c,) for the passage of all the ex- cretions, extends from the anterior part of the open sac. In the centre of the arms or feet, radiating from the head, is placed the mouth (d,) provided with two dense and sharp mandibles, and the two long muscular tentacula (e,) extend from the fore part of the head (/,) between the first and second pairs of feet. In many of the naked cephalopods the dorsal shell contained within the substance of the mantle is destitute of calcareous matter, and reduced to a mere thin, flexible, transpa- rent, cartilagenous lamina, as we find in the loligo, the sepiola, the loligopsis, and others. These uncalcified shells are contained in a dorsal sac of the mantle, like the cal- careous laminated shell of the sepia. The position of the thin, stiliform, cartilaginous lamina in the lack of the sepiola vulgaris, is seen in (Fig. 26. 1. ,) where the co- loured covering and skin have been removed to show the situation of the hard parts and the superficial muscles. The dorsal la- mina (,) is here very small, flexible and short from the great mobility of the muscular part, which forms its sheath. In the loligopsis guttata, the dorsal lamina (Fig. 26. 2,) extends the whole length of the back of the man- tle to the point of the tail, being spear-shaped, with very thin flexible edges, especially at its broadest middle part. That of the loligo sagittata, (Fig. 26. 3,) is more broad and leaf-shaped, and extends, as most of the other soft, cartilaginous, internal shells, from the upper edge of the mantle to the point of the tail, being contained loose in a closed dorsal sac of the mantle. In the octopus, the dorsal lamina is wanting, but there are two small lateral stiliform, loose, cartilaginous pieces contained in the sub- stance of the mantle, as the median shell in other species. In this highly complicated class of molluscous ani- mals, which approach so near to the cartilaginous fishes in the structure of many of their internal parts, we already find several internal rudimentary pieces of an organized cartilaginous skeleton. The brain encompassing the eeso- phagus is enclosed in a large curved cranical .bone, which forms also part of the orbits on each side, contains the cavities of the ears, and has numerous muscles inserted into it. Other cartilaginous, organized pieces are seen extending downwards from the back part the skull, like the rudiment of a vertebral column. Two clavicular pieces in front unite to the first rudiments of a sternum, and attach the sides of the mantle to the trunk, and there are generally two scapular pieces, more or less firm, extending along the sides to which the muscles of the lateral fins are attached. These two scapular pieces are seen in the sepiola vulgaris, (Fig. 26. 1.) b, where they support the arms (c, c } ) and are freely moveable on the back, like the scapulae of vertebrata. We also perceive muscles inserted into the strong upper and lower man- dibles (Fig. 26. 5. 0, b,) of these animals, formed like the bills of a parrot. The suckers of the arms, (Fig. 26. 4. b, c,) whether sessile (c,) or pedunculated (b } ) have their inner circular margins supported, each by a firm cartila- ginous circular plate (,) with minute sharp teeth extend- ing inwards from one of its sides, by which the action of these prehensile organs is aided. In the onychia, there are dense, sharp, curved, conical spines placed in these suckers, like the conical teeth disposed on the oral disk of lampreys, among the lowest of the cartilaginous fishes. In the lowest vertebrated animals we still find traces of the external unorganized shells of inferior classes, in the form of calcareous scales in fishes, and of horny plates in many reptiles ; but these are generally reduced to small detached pieces, and do not serve as organs of support. The organs of support in the vertebrated classes are placed within the soft parts, so that these animals are more intimately related to the properties of surround- ing objects and outward nature, by the sensibility and delicacy of their surface. Their skeleton being internal, it is not exuviable in a mass, and as it cannot grow and preserve its proportions by the simple addition of layers to its surface, it is organized or permeated in all directions by vessels which take "away and replace its materials atom by atom. The phosphate of lime, which forms the chief consolidating earth, increases in its pro- portion to the gelatin as we ascend through the verte- brated classes ; so that the bones of the lowest fishes are soft, flexible, and cartilaginous ; those of hot-blooded classes are of great density and strength, and those of reptiles possess intermediate properties. The bones have a fibrous structure, which is the best adapted for the transmission of minute vessels through their texture. They form solid levers for the motions of the body, and cavities to protect its viscera. The most constant and the first formed part of the skeleton is the verte- bral column, which is composed of moveable vertebrae, each of which consists of several elements that are found most isolated and distinct in the lowest classes, and in the embryo state of the highest. The elements which appear most constant and distinct in the composition of a vertebra are the round central body, or cyclo-vertebral element, the two superior laminae or peri-vertebral ele- ments which encompass the spinal chords, the two por- tions of the superior spinous process, or the epi-vertebral elements, the two inferior laminae, or para vertebral ele- ments, which form a cavity for the blood-vessels, and the two portions of the inferior spinous process, or the cata-vertebral elements. The most frequent position of these nine component elements of a perfect vertebra is shown in the annexed diagram, (Fig. 27.) where (a,) repre- sents the spinal cord protected by the two peri-vertebral pieces ; (b,) is the common position of the artery, and (c } ) of the vein beneath the bodies of the vertebrae in most parts of the column, and these are embraced by the two para- vertebral elements. The cyclo-vertebral ele- ments are tubular in the articulated classes of animals where they envelope the whole trunk as hollow seg- ments, they are nearly solid to their centre, and present two concave surfaces in fishes ; they are convexo-concave in reptiles, and have flat surfaces in mammalia. They are the most constant and typical parts of the vertebral column. The other vertebral elements vary their forms and positions chiefly according to the dimensions of the organs they embrace, and the extent of surface required for muscular attachment ; consequently they vary much in different parts of the same column, and in the ske- letons of different classes. Three very different positions of the same vertebral elements are represented in this diagram (Fig. 28,) where A shows their most common positions with relation to each other in the caudal por- tion of the skeleton of an osseous fish where they are de- signed to give great extension for the attachment of the powerful lateral muscles which move the tail. The body of the vertebra, or cyclo-vertebral element (a,) supports the two superior laminae or peri- vertebral elements (b, b,) which early unite above to form the small foramer for the spiral cord (e) ; and beyond their termination we observe the interspinous bone (c,) and the ray (d,) of the external fin, which are the two epi-vertebral elements placed in a vertical line. The analogous elements are seen on the lower part of the vertebra, where the two inferior laminae (/,/,) or para-vertebral elements, form a larger foramen for the lodgment of the great continua- tion of the aorta (i,) above, and the vena cava (&,) below. The inferior interspinous bone (g,) and the ray (h,) of the external fin, are the two cata-vertebral elements placed in a vertical line, like the epi-vertebrals above. These vertebral elements often assume, in the region of the abdomen in fishes, the position marked in the diagram B, of Fig. 28, where the superior elements remain as in Fig. A, but the inferior laminae or para-vertebrals, are stretched out in a horizontal direction, and have the two cata-vertebrals (g,y,) extended from their ends in form of a pair of ribs to encompass the organs of this part of the trunk. The vertebral elements situate above the body of the bone expand in the region of the head in the same manner as we here see those below the cyclo-vertebral element in the region of the abdomen ; and this they do in order to encompass the soft parts contained in the cavity of the skull, and in the face. Another position of these vertebral pieces, which is common in the caudal region of the column in higher classes, especially among the long-tailed reptiles, and in cetaceous mammalia, is represented in the diagram C of Fig. 28, where we observe the large foramen for the nervous columns (/,) above the cyclo-vertebral element (a,) requiring the whole extent of the two peri-vertebrals (b, b,) for its formation, and the strong superior spinous pro- cess is composed of the two epi-vertebrals placed side by side. In the lower part of the same vertebra the inferior laminae extend outwards to form strong trans- verse processes and an inferior spinous process, and an inferior foramen for the aorta (i,) and the vena cava (#,) are formed by the approximation of the two cata-vertebrals ( g, gj) which show their displacement by being generally thrust backwards between two cyclo-ver- tebral elements. When the two cata- vertebral elements are extended outwards to form ribs in fishes, we very often find them bifurcated, as represented in Fig. 28. The general form of the vertebral elements is very much modified and varied in different parts of the column by the shape and magnitude of the parts these elements embrace, and the extent of surface for muscular attach- ments which they require to present. The epi- and peri- vertebrals are most expanded in the skull and the sacrum, and the para- and cata-vertebrals, where they embrace the viscera of the trunk. The appearance of the entire skeleton of vertebrated animals is greatly varied by the difference in the position of the ribs, or of that part of the column where the para- and cata-vertebral elements are extended over the great viscera of the trunk. In fishes, as shown in the annexed figure, (Fig. 29. 3,) and in cetaceous mammalia, the fixed, ribbed, and thoracic part of the column (,) is placed near its anterior extre- mity, and all the posterior portion is freely moveable, to give impulse to the tail in swimming. In birds, (Fig. 29. 2,) where the head and neck are used as a hand and arm, for all prehensile pur- poses, the fixed thora- cic portion (a,) of the column is placed near to its posterior extremity, and the anterior portion is free for extensive mo- tion. Most quadrupeds (Fig. 29. 1,) and reptiles, balanced on two pairs of extremities, hold an in- termediate place, and have the ribbed and solid portion ( a, ) of their trunk placed near the middle of the column. XIX. Pisces. The bones of fishes contain less gelatine, and a larger proportion of water than those of higher classes, and are less dense and compact in their texture. The soft bones of cartilaginous fishes yield more water than those of osseous fishes, and they contain the soluble salts of soda, the chloruret, the sub-carbonate, and the sulphate, while the more dense bones of osseous fishes are strengthened, like those of higher classes, with the more insoluble phosphates. The bones of fishes resemble those of the embryos of higher animals, not only in their soft, gelatinous, or cartilaginous character, but also in the isolated condition of all the elements, or centres of ossification, of the more complicated bones, especially of the head. The skeleton of fishes consists almost entirely of the vertebral column, from the extremity of the face to the end of the tail, like that of the embryos of mam- malia at a corresponding stage of their development. The bodies of the vertebrae are composed of concentric layers, as represented in Fig. 30. 0, which are broadest at the circumference, and become narrower as they approach the centre, where there is commonly a small hole (Fig. 30. b, b.) These bodies are therefore concave both on their anterior and posterior surfaces, and when applied to each other, they leave large intevertebral spaces between them, which are filled up each with a short sac of a gelatinous thin fluid, as seen in Fig. 30. C. c, so that these vertebrae play freely over the surface of so many elastic interposed balls. The bodies of the vertebrae are the elements first developed in the animal kingdom. They are the most important, as means of support ; they are the parts most developed in the vertebrae of fishes, and the skeletons of the lowest cartilaginous species, are com- posed almost solely of these elements. Even in the sharks, the other elements are remarkably small and are not ajichy- losed to the bodies of the vertebrae ; so that by macera- tion they fall off, and leave deep depressions ( Fig. 30. B, c.) in the sides of the cyclo-vertebral elements where they were attached. By the great size of the central passage in the bodies of the vertebrae of many cartila- ginous fishes, the inter-vertebral substances communicate with each other, and form a continuous elastic beaded chord passing through the whole vertebral column, as in the lampreys. The component elements of the vertebrae of fishes are disposed in such a manner as to give great vertical extension to the trunk, and thus to form a broad lateral surface to strike the water in their horizontal mode of progression. As the spinal chord is small, the upper vertebral foramen is also small in fishes, and the two superior laminae therefore soon meet to form a spinous process by their junction, as seen in the skeleton of the perch, (Fig. 31. c,c, c.) Along the greater portion of the back, we observe the two epi-vertebral elements (Fig. 3 1 . 74, 75,) placed end to end in a vertical direction, the short inferior portion forming the interspinous bone. (74,) and the more slender superior portion extending from the trunk and covered with a prolonged fold of the skin, forms a ray (75,) of the dorsal fin, and thus are con- structed all the dorsal fins placed along the middle of the back from the head to the tail. The same two ele- ments in several of the last cocygeal vertebrae, pass back- wards in a very oblique manner, and constitute the cau- dal fin (70, 78.) The corresponding elements below the bodies of the vertebrae occupy the same relative position wherever there are anal fins developed between the tail and the anus, as at a, J2. The inferior foramen of the vertebrae, for the blood vessel is larger than that above for the spinal chord, and it widens much in the pelvic region (83,) in order to embrace the posterior parts of the urinary and genital organs. The elements of the cocygeal vertebras of fishes being thus extended upwards and downwards, they present no transverse processes in that region to impede the lateral motions of the tail, and their nervous and vascular systems are here protected from injury during the violent actions of that part of the body. In the region of the abdomen the inferior interspinous bones and the rays are placed at the ends of the trans- verse processes, and extended more or less round the viscera, as ribs (72,) which often present a bifurcated ap- pearance by their sending a long process (73,) outwards and backwards. The ribs are often merely minute epiphyses at the ends of the transverse processes, as in the rays and sharks, and they are continued forwards along the vertebral column to the atlas ; so that there are no dis- tinct free cervical vertebras. The bodies of the cranical vertebrae continue along the floor of the cranium through the basilar part of the occipital bone, the body of the sphenoid, the ethmoid, and the vomer ; and these parts are here extended forward in the same straight line with the rest of the vertebral column. The ordinary concave ends of the bodies of the vertebrae can be traced for- ward to a variable extent through those of the cranium, as at both ends of the basilar portion of the occipital, and of the body of the spenoid. The bones of the cranium in osseous fishes are generally thin, diaphanous, elastic, united by squamous sutures ; they present a large exterior surface for the attachment of the powerful muscles of the trunk, and they continue to grow and to preserve the same proportions to the rest of the skeleton through life. The interior of the large cranical cavity is filled chiefly by the soft cellular tissue of the arachnoid coat, the brain occupying but a small portion of the base of the skull. The number of distinct osseous pieces in the composition of the skull is greatest in fishes, and they correspond nearly with the theory of this part of the ske- leton, being composed of seven vertebrae, each consisting as usual, of a body with four elements above, and four elements below. The number of separate pieces diminishes as we ascend through the vertebrated classes, by the early and permanent anchylosis of a variable number of these elements common to all forms of crania. The spine of the occipital bone, or the superior oc- cipital (8,) is here large for muscular attachments, like that of the vertebrae of the trunk ; and this ridge is often continued forward over the whole skull to the nose. From the horizontal position of the head on the trunk, the occipitals and the frontals generally meet and force the parietals (7,) to assume a lateral position, as we see in the skulls of cetacea, for the same reason. The ele- ments of the temporal bone are large^ detached, and mostly moveable. The petrous portion is exterior to the organ of hearing in the osseous fishes, and surrounds that organ, imbedding it in its substance in the cartila- ginous species,, as in higher classes. The principal frontal bones (I,) are long and bounded before and laterally by the anterior frontals (2,) and on the posterior and lateral part by the posterior frontals (4,) as in other oviparous vertebrata. The jugal (19,) is generally long, curved, and slender, as in the blowing cetacea, and composed of a series of separate pieces, which bound the inferior margin of the orbit, they form the suborbital bones of Cuvier. The detached condition of the bones of the head is most remarkable in those of the anterior part of the face, where the palatine bones ( 22, ) extending longitudinally on the sides of the mouth, and often covered with teeth, as in serpents, are freely moveable. The superior maxilla- ries (18,) extending downwards laterally behind the inter- maxillaries (17,) on each side of the face, are loosely ar- ticulated to the vomer (16',) and to the palatine bones, and are freely moveable in the osseous fishes, as are also the intennaxillaries ( 1 7,) which bound the fore part of the upper jaw. The lower jaw is generally composed of at least two pieces on each side, the dental portion (34,) in front containing the teeth, and the articular portion (35,) behind connected with the head by a tympanic bone, (below 27,) considered by Cuvier as the jugal. Fishes have teeth implanted in almost every bone around the interior of the mouth, in the intermaxillary, superior and inferior maxillary bones, on the branchial arches, pharyn- geal bones, palatine bones, os hyoides, and on the tongue itself. The teeth are almost entirely osseous, without fangs, and without alveoli ; irregular in size and position, generally recurved spines placed in numerous rows, and they often become anchylosed to the bones which sup- port them. Their soft osseous texture, their thin cover- ing of enamel, and their feeble attachment, correspond with the soft condition and the imperfect union of the bones which support these prehensile teeth, as we see also in amphibia and serpents. Where the bones of the head, which support them, are strong, and firmly united, as in crocodilian reptiles and mammalia, the teeth are more dense, covered with a thicker layer of enamel, provided with fangs, and lodged in deep alveoli. Behind the lower jaw is placed the operculum, consisting of a large opercular bone (28,) a sub-opercular bone (32,) an inter- opercular bone (33,) and often an additional small piece below the sub-opercular. As fishes have no tympanic cavity of the ear to confine their ossicula auditus, the opercular bone is considered as an enlarged stapes, the sub-opercular bone as the os orbiculare, the inter-oper- cular as the malleus,, and the fourth small bone as the iocus. These are placed behind the pre-opercular bone, (30,) and have been also regarded by some as elements of the lower jaw. The arches, which hang down from the sides of the vertebral column, are more like ribs in fishes than in higher classes, as the lower jaw, the os hyoides, the sca- pular arch, and that of the pelvis. The os hyoides is very large here, as in all water-breathing vertebrata, from its supporting the branchial arches ; it consists of five pairs of pieces besides the body or lingual bone ; it is suspended from the temporal bones, and it is chiefly by its motions backwards and forwards that respiration is effected, not only in fishes, but in amphibia and chelonia. It forms the second arch below the head, between the arch formed by the lower jaw, and that formed by the scapular and coracoid bones. Its sides support the four pairs of branchial arches, the analogues of tracheal rings, and its exterior gives at- tachment to the branchiostegous rays of the opercular membrane. The arms of fishes, or their pectoral fins are almost always more developed than their legs, or ventral fins, and they are generally attached to the back part of the skull, by means of an osseous arch composed behind of the two scapulse, and before of the two coracoid bones. In the perch (Fig. 31.) the two highest or first portions of this arch on each side (46, and 47,) are regarded as the scapulae, the long angular bone (48, 48.) attached to these, as the humerus, the two succeeding bones (51,52,) as the ulna and the radius. To these succeed the bones of the carpus (53,) and this member is terminated by the long and nu- merous phalanges of the fingers. The small styliform ter- mination (50,) of the scapular arch, composed sometimes of one, and sometimes, as in the perch, of two pieces (49, 50,) is considered as the coracoid bone, and they occasion- ally meet in front, as in higher oviparous classes, though without the intervention of a sternum. The relative mag- nitude of the arms of fishes, and their constancy, compared with the posterior members, corresponds with their great size in the embryo of higher classes, and their preceding the legs in their development from the trunk. The posterior members, the legs, or the ventral fins of fishes (80, 81, 82,) are unconnected with the vertebral column, suspended from two rib-like iliac bones, and placed on the lower part of the trunk, sometimes near the anus, sometimes near the head, or between these two parts. The iliac bones not being here attached to the vertebral column, there is no portion of that column fixed to form a sacrum, and the same is observed in the cetacea, and the perennibranchiate am- phibia, where there is no sacrum, and the whole column behind the head is thus free for the extensive motion re- quired in swimming. These two pelvic bones (80,) are sometimes closely applied to each other, extend along the middle of the abdominal surface, like two pubic bones, and are attached to the scapular arch, or to the humeri (48,) as in the perch. In the apodal fishes, as the eels, the pelvic bones (80,) are wanting, as well as the legs ; and in the abdominal fishes, the pelvic bones are quite unconnected with the skeleton. From this freedom of the posterior members in fishes, they are most frequently placed forward, near the head, where they afford least impediment to the lateral motions of the vertebral column. The long pha- langes of the feet (81, 82,) are attached directly to the pelvic bones, there being seldom a trace of the intermediate bones of the legs developed in this class, where they are not required either to give support to the trunk, or mobility to the feet. In the plagiostome cartilaginous fishes, the highest ani- mals of this class, the ribs and the spinous processes of the vertebrae of the trunk, are as little developed as in am- phibia, many of the anterior vertebrae (e 9 ) of the trunk, are often anchylosed, and the whole bones of the cranium are united into a single piece, as seen in the skeleton of the common skate, raia betis, ( Fig. 32.) The skull is of great size, with tough, thick, cartilaginous pa- rietes ; it is filled chiefly with the soft, glary, arachnoid tissue, and contains within the thick- ness of the temporal bone the whole of the internal ear. From each side of the head there passes down a short, round, moveable piece (,) in the situation of the tympanic bone, which supports the lower jaw (d,) and the moveable, free upper jaw (c,) both covered closely with small teeth, like mosaic work. The scapular arch (/,) is fixed to the anterior, thick, anchylosed portion (e,) of the vertebral column, and the bones of the arms are also anchylosed together, and to this scapular arch. This fish lies at the bottom without an air-bag ; its motions therefore in swimming being chiefly vertical, its hands (g, g,) are very large, and extended nearly round the whole trunk, from the point of the nose to the pelvic arch (h.} In the large hands of the rays and sharks, there are not only very numerous fingers or rays, but each finger (g,) is divided into a variable number of short, cylindrical phalanges, slightly dilated at their points of contact. The pelvic arch (h,) is generally very perfect in the plagiostome chondropterygii, and presents the rudiments of the three ordinary con- stituent bones, the ilium, the ischium, and the pubis, on each side ; the two pubic bones united form a band passing transversely before the anus, the iliac bones ascend taper- ing to near the sides of the column, and the ischium on each side passes backwards. The feet are less than the hands, and consist of toes (i, i,) which are shorter, less numerous, and less divided than the fingers, ( g. ) The great size of the hand is the more required in the rays, from the smallness of the tail rendering it almost use- less as an organ of motion. In the sword-fish, and in the saw-fish, the upper jaw bones, the vomer, and the nasal bones form a long projecting weapon of offence extending from the face above the free intermaxillaries, which bound the upper part of the mouth. The orbits are prolonged laterally to a great distance in the zycena, or hammer-headed shark, so as to give a pedunculated appearance to the eyes. From the softness of the skeleton in the cartilaginous fishes, the mouth, and especially the lower jaw, is very short, and often extended much transversely ; and for the same reason, these animals have numerous rows o'f teeth prepared to supply the places of those which are successively lost, as in the sharks, or have their jaws covered, as in the rays, with a continuous compact layer of small permanent teeth. XX. Amphibia. The amphibious or batrachian animals commence their career as fishes, with one auricle and one ventricle, and breathing by means of gills which in many are retained through life, but in their adult state they ac- quire a pulmonic respiration, arid a pulmonic auricle of the heart, and this early aquatic life and subsequent meta- morphosis affect the whole condition of the skeleton, and the forms of the several bones. The skeletons of the am- phibia come nearest to those of fishes in the imperfect ossification, and the thin, diaphanous, elastic character of the bones, in the loose condition of the bones of the face, and in the imperfect development of the ribs. The perennibranchiate amphibia, and the tadpoles of the caducibranchiate species, present the softest and the most detached condition of the bones, and the most fish-like form of the whole skeleton. Their vertebral column is prolonged backwards to a great extent, as an organ of motion ; their arms and legs are wanting, or are very imperfectly developed, and their os hyoides, like that of a fish, supports a variable number of branchial arches, as seen in the annexed figure of the skeleton of the proteus anguinus (Fig. 33.) The ver- tebrse here have the bodies terminated before and behind by concave surfaces, as in fishes, and all the processes of these vertebrae are short, to allow of extensive motion, especially in a lateral direction. There is no sacrum, and the pelvic (&,) and scapular (#,) arches are as free as in fishes. A few small de- tached points of bone at the ends of the transverse processes of some of the anterior dorsal vertebrae are the only ribs here developed ; and in this, as in many other characters, the pro- teus and the siren resemble the sharks. The parietal (e,) and the frontal bones are long and separate, the tympanic bone is long and moveable. The wide inferior jaws, the long in- termaxillaries, and the loose upper jaw-bones are provided with sharp, recurved, conical teeth. The body (,) and cornua (a,) of the os hyoides are proportionally large, and support the three branchial arches (c,) on each side to which the permanent gills (d,) are attached. The flat dorsal portion of the scapula (^,) is thin and cartilaginous, and the coracoid pieces (/,) meet in front by broad extended edges. There are only three toes (h,) developed on the fore feet, the two inner consisting of three phalanges, and the outer of two ; and on the hind feet there are only two toes (i,) each consisting of three bones. The expanded, cartilaginous, iliac bones (&,) extend upwards to the sides of the vertebral column, as in the plagiostome fishes, without being attached to a sacrum, and the pubic bones unite with each other and with the ischia, to form a transverse anterior band for the support of the small legs. The condition of all parts of the skeleton is nearly the same in the siren lacertina, where the prolonged fish-like vertebral column has still greater freedom of motion from the entire want of legs and a pelvic arch ; the spinous processes of the verteBse are more elevated, the coracoid bones meet by a longer sur- face, the hands have four toes, there are four branchial arches on each side : the body and cornua of the os hyoides are very large, and the tympanic and intermaxillary bones are as moveable as in a fish. The ribs are developed to a greater extent in the land salamander, where they have the form of straight tapering spines extending from the trans- verse processes of all the vertebrae of the trunk. The arms and legs which here support the trunk in a lighter me- dium than in the former animals, have all their bones larger and stronger, and have four toes before and behind. The whole bones of the skull and face are more fixed in their articulations, and the pelvic arch is more connected with the sides of the vertebral column, but without forming a sacrum. It is however in the anurous amphibia, as the common frog, (Fig. 34.) that we find the most solid and fixed con- dition of all the bones, and the nearest approach to rep- tiles and higher classes in the structure of the different parts of the skeleton. The vertebra of the tadpole are formed like those of a fish, with two cup-like cavities, but by the ossification and anchylosis of the intervertebral soft substance, it becomes fixed to the posterior end of the body of each vertebra, so as to change their forms almost to those of reptiles. A great portion of their vertebral column, and of their os hyoides, and their branchial arches become absorbed, their legs and arms become developed, and many of the coccygeal vertebrae unite to form a single piece ; so that these anurous highest kinds of amphibia pass through the inferior forms of their class before arriving at their perfect state. There are nine vertebrae in the frog (Fig. 34.) the first of which (b,) has a double articular sur- face, like two condy- loid depressions for the two prominent condyles formed by the body of the occipital bone (a,) and this atlas is without transverse processes. The bodies of the succeeding ver- tebrae terminate pos- teriorly by slightly con- vex surfaces, and an- teriorly by correspond- ing depressions, and the transverse pro- cesses are long, but irregular in their forms and magnitude. There are no ribs, and the pelvic arch is moveably connected with the ends of the transverse processes of the last or ninth vertebra (c, c.) This single vertebra forms, therefore, a true sacrum, and the succeeding coccygeal vertebrae (d,) are anchylosed into a single unperforated bone, slightly grooved at its commencement, running along the dorsal part of the pelvis, and entirely concealed within this part of the trunk. The two iliac bones (e, e,) long, cylindrical, and slightly curved, extend backwards from the sides of the sacrum (c, c,) to the ossa ischii (f,) behind, and the small pubic bones in front ; and these three bones, united by sutures, form on each side of this compressed terminal part (/,) of the pelvis, the cotyloid cavity for the reception of the. head of the femur. The legs are here very large, both for leaping and swimming. The long femur (/,) is suc- ceeded by another long single bone (w, m,) the grooved surface of which shows it to be formed of the tibia and fibula anchylosed together. To this succeeds a lengthened astragulus and calcaneum (n,) then three very minute cunei- form bones of the tarsus, and then the lengthened bones of the meta- tarsus and the phalanges of the five toes (o.) The humeri (A, A,) are comparatively short, strong, and slightly bent ; the radius and the ulna (i, i,) are anchylosed like the tibia and fibula, and the six small carpal bones (k, k,) are succeeded by four long meta-carpal bones, the phalanges of four fingers, and a small rudiment internally of a fifth. The scapular apparatus (Fig. 35,) for the support of the arms is here very complete, and also the sternum, although there are no ribs to reach it. The posterior curved portions (, t,) of the scapulae, are thin and cartilaginous, as in many fishes and reptiles, and the anterior parts (f)f y ) which chiefly contribute to the formation of the glenoid cavity (k, k,) for the head of the humerus is strong, and ossified. From the gle- noid cavity, on each side, proceeds inwards the coracoid bone (e, e,) which expands as it reaches the sternum (d.) Above the two coracoid bones, (e, e 9 ) are the two slender cla- vicles (c, c,) which also proceed from the glenoid cavities to the sternum, and leave a considerable vacant space between them and the coracoid bones. The anterior (a,) and the posterior (h,) portions of the sternum are thin, flexible, car- tilaginous laminae, and the intermediate parts are ossified and strong, for the insertion of muscles, the support of the scapular arch, and the protection of the fore part of the trunk. The upper thin portion (,) appears to consist of the two epi-sternal pieces, the next part (b,) of the two hyo- sternal elements, the next (d) the single ento-sternal, to which both the clavicles and coracoid bones are attached ; the next (t/ 9 ) the two hypo-sternal elements, and the inferior, thin, cartilaginous, terminal piece (h,) the two united xiphi- sternal elements which usually terminate this bone. The bones of the head, even in the highest of the caduci- branchiate amphibia, are still as loosely united together as in most of the osseous fishes, as is seen in the skull of the common frog, rana esculenta, (Fig. 36.) The occipital bone has its basilar part divided by a vertical suture, and is se- curely united to the atlas by two prominent condyles (b, b,) belonging to that portion of the bone. The parietals (c 9 c 9 ) are long, narrow, near- ly separated by a sagittal suture, arid extend forward over a large portion of this lengthened narrow cranium, as we see also in ophidian and saurian reptiles. The sphenoid bone has also a very lengthened form along the base of the skull, as in fishes. On the fore part of the skull are the two posterior frontals (a,) separate in the young frogs, but united into a single bone extended between the parietals (c, c,) and the two anterior frontals (h, h,) which extend laterally to the two pterygoid, and the two upper jaw-bones (&, k.) The two intermaxillary bones (/,/,) the two upper jaws (k, k,) and two bones behind these, regarded as divisions of the vomer, are provided with small, sharp, recurved conical teeth, although none are found opposed to them in the lower jaw. The slender jugal bone (o,) is ex- tended from the upper jaw bone backwards and downwards to the lower end of the long tympanic (,) which is here moveable, as in most oviparous vertebrata. The tympanic bone (n,) here, as in most of the lower vertebrata, sends down a condyloid process to be articulated with a glenoid cavity (/,) on the back part of the lower jaw. The lower jaw is divided at the symphisis, and each lateral portion consists of an anterior (s,) a middle (r,) and a posterior (/,) piece, which extend to a great distance transversely, and are en- tirely destitute of teeth, although there are teeth in the lower jaw of the salamander and the proteus. As we pro- ceed upwards through the vertebrated classes, the teeth become more circumscribed in their number and in their distribution over the parietes of the mouth, till we find them confined to a single row disposed along the upper and lower jaws. We thus observe in the adult anurous amphibia a greater consolidation of the whole texture of the bones, and of the different parts of the skeleton than we find in fishes ; and many elements originally separate have become anchylosed together, which conditions prepare the solid frame-work to support and carry the whole fabric through a much rarer medium than the dense water in which they commenced their career, and in which the fishes perma- nently reside. XXI. Reptilia. The bones of serpents are more com- pact, white, dense, and elastic than those of the other orders of reptiles ; but their skeleton is the most deficient in its parts, consisting almost solely of the vertebral column without legs or arms, or a pelvic or scapular arch, or even a sternum to connect the ribs, as seen in the skeleton of the boa constrictor, (Fig. 3J-) With this simple skeleton they are able to creep quickly on the ground, to combat with their prey, to climb trees, to spring into the air, and to swim rivers and lakes. The ribs are developed from the sides of the vertebral column from the atlas to the anus, and the transverse processes continue to extend to a considerable length from the sides of many of the anterior coccygeal vertebrae. From the absence of a sternum in front, and the free articulation of the ribs with the ends of the transverse processes of the vertebrae, the ribs possess the means of extensive motion, and cause the transverse scuta on the lower surface of the abdomen to move like so many feet. The ribs of serpents are tubular, with thin compact parietes, and containing a soft cancellated structure in their interior, by which they possess great elasticity and strength. They are narrow, and compressed from before backwards, strong and broad at their head and neck, and taper regularly to their free ventral extremity, where they generally terminate with a thin, flexible, cartilaginous prolongation. Their head presents a broad, arched, concave surface, to form a secure and free articulation with the rounded, prominent, transverse processes of the vertebrae. The broad and long transverse processes in the coccygeal region of the column, cover a long pelvic cavity in the male, in which the two divisions of the penis are lodged in their retracted state. As the ribs ex- tend along the whole sides of the trunk, from the head to the anus, there are no cervical nor lumbar vertebrae ; and as there are no legs nor pelvis, there is no sacrum. The vertebrae are here more numerous than in any other class of animals, so that there is great flexibility of the whole body, and their articulations are remarkably secure from the extent and the number of the articular surfaces between each pair of vertebras. All the processes of these vertebrae are short, to admit of greater freedom of motion, ex- cepting the four articular processes, which are very broad, to give a greater security of attachment ; and hence the quadran- gular or cubical form presented by the vertebrae of serpents,as seen in the front view of those of the boa constrictor) (Fig. 38.) The lower part of the body of each vertebra terminates in a large, oblique, hemispherical convexity (a,) smooth on the surface, and covered with a thin layer of cartilage. This prominent end of the vertebra is received into a corres- ponding deep, cup-like cavity (b 9 ) with sharp margins, and lined with carti- lage, at the anterior end of the next succeeding vertebra, and this regular ball-and-socket form of articulation is continued through the whole vertebral column. These articulations are se- cured by strong capsular ligaments, and lubricated by a copious secretion of synovia. The two anterior, and the two posterior arti- cular processes present broad flat surfaces, extended trans- versely, those of the anterior vertebra passing over those of the next succeeding vertebra, as in other classes. The shortness of the transverse processes (Fig. 38. c, c, c,c,) allows of a greater extent of lateral motion in the column, and, for the same reason, the vertebral foramina for the spinal chord are most dilated before and behind in that direction. These very short, strong, transverse processes have each a large, convex, prominent, articular surface, ex- tending downwards, inwards, and a little forwards, which is received into the articular concavity of the head of the rib. From the four articular processes of the vertebrae extending to a great distance laterally in a straight and horizontal direction, they give great extent and safety to those lateral motions which are chiefly required in the trunk of serpents. The bodies of the dorsal vertebras are cari- nated below, and have a narrow contracted neck at the base of the posterior, hemispherical, articular tubercle. The laminae are here very strong, and evasated before and behind, to enlarge the two ends of each vertebral foramen, that the spinal chord may not be pressed upon during the mo- tions of the vertebrae. The spmous processes are short, strong, and broad, from before backwards, so as to afford a strong attachment to the muscles, without interfering with the motions of the vertebrae. In the skulls of reptiles, as in fishes and amphibia, we still find the cranial vertebrae disposed in the same straight line as those of the rest of the column, and most of the elements of the cranial bones still remain separate through life. The serpents and lizards present the most detached condition of all these cranial bones met with in the class of reptiles ; the crocodilian animals, and the chelonia have them the most firmly united by sutures. This loose state of the bones of the head is the more necessary in serpents, which, from the want of arms and legs to hold down their prey, and assist in its subdivision, are compelled to swallow it entire. The annexed figure of the skull of the python (Fig. 39.) shows the most common disposition and form of the bones of the head of serpents. The basilar portion (a,) of the occipital bone remains distinctly isolated from the two lateral condyloid pieces  and these three elements form the large, transversely elongated, occipital condyle, the basilar element forming the greater portion of it. The superior or median occipital (,) is here small and detached as in the saurian reptiles. The parietal bones (c, c,) are long, and anchylosed together along the median line, to afford a solid unyielding covering to the lengthened brain beneath them. These two bones are thus early united in most other reptiles, in all birds, and in the greater number even of the mammalia, although they are separate in the normal form of the human skull. This condition of the two pari- etals is the more required in serpents, from the loose state of most of the other bones of the head, and the exposure of these animals to the trampling of qua- drupeds, and other dangers while they lie concealed in their natu- ral haunts. The anchylosis of the two parietal s gives greater security to the strong temporal muscles of these animals, as in other classes, where this solidity of attachment is required. From the length, and the loose attach- ment of the squamous portion (e } ) of the temporal bone to the parietals, the tympanic bone (/,) and consequently the lower jaw (#,) has much greater ex- tent of motion in a lateral direction. The two anterior (i, i,) the two middle (h, h,) and the two posterior (k, k,) frontals remain detached, and form, as in other reptiles, the greater portion of the front of the skull. The great breadth of the two lachrymal (/, /,) and of the two nasal (p 9 p 9 ) bones corresponds with the general flat and broad form of the head of serpents. The two upper jaw-bones (m, m,) and the two intermaxillaries (q,) are separate and quite moveable on the surrounding bones ; and the two palatines are also moveable and long, and support the most permanent teeth of these animals. The two sides of the lower jaw are quite detached from each other, and freely moveable at the sym- phesis, and the pieces of which it is composed are also moveable. This freedom of motion of the lower jaw (g, t/ 9 ) extends through the long tympanic (/,/,) and squamous (e, <?,) elements of the temporal bone to its more fixed petrous portion (</,) so that the mouth is here capable of extraordinary dilation, to transmit through its cavity entire prey, which the serpents have not the means of dividing. Their teeth are organs of prehension, and not of mastica- tion ; they are conical, slender, sharp, recurved, osseous spines, covered with enamel, with very shallow alveoli, placed along the upper and lower jaws, the intermaxillaries, and the palatine bones. The upper jaw bones in the poi- sonous snakes terminate abruptly in a round peduncle below and before the orbits, which supports the tubular poison- fang, and the small teeth which usually accompany it upon each side of the head. The saurian reptiles have the skeleton more complete than the serpents, as they possess a complex sternum, and scapular apparatus, a fixed pelvis, together with atlantal and sacral extremities ; but the transition from the one form is very gradual from the serpents with the rudiments of pelvic and scapular bones, to the bimanous and the biped lizards ; and from these to the regular saurians with fore feet, and to the more solid and complete forms of the skeleton presented by the crocodilian reptiles. By the increased development of all the processes of the vertebral column, we perceive the preparation for more solidity in the articulations, and more limited motions in that part of the skeleton, the loco- motion is now to be effected by the arms and legs, and not by the vertebral column, as in most of the lower vertebrata. The large bones of the sauria present a coarse fibrous struc- ture, contain a large proportion of animal matter, and have a cancellated loose texture internally, where we find tubular cavities in the birds and mammalia. The bodies of the ver- tebrae, in the lacertine sauria, preserve the ball-and-socket joint throughout the column ; but these parts of the verte- brae are more compressed, and the articulations are more oblique than in the serpents. From the necessity for sup- porting the trunk upon the legs, the pelvis is united firmly to a sacrum, consisting generally of only two enlarged ver- tebrae. The bodies of the vertebrae are generally more lengthened, and the articular processes more extended in a longitudinal direction than in the serpents. There are two concave surfaces of the bodies of the vertebrae, of the gecko, as in fishes and tadpoles, and in the ichthyosaurus. In the coccygeal vertebrae, besides the lengthened superior spinous process, and the two transverse processes, there are inferior spinous processes, which are interposed between the bodies of the vertebrae, and by forming a small arch they give protection to the large blood-vessels of the tail, which is generally a thick muscular continuation of the trunk. There are false ribs in front of the true, as well as behind them, as we see also in birds, and in some mam- malia ; and there are generally about seven cervical vertebrae, as in quadrupeds. The head is extended forwards in the same straight line with the vertebral column, as in the inferior vertebrated classes. As in these inferior classes also we observe the bones of the head of the lacertine rep- tiles remarkably loose and moveable in their articulations, as seen in this figure of the skull of the lacerta nilotica, Cuv. (Fig. 40.) The occipital bone, as in the serpents, has its transversely elongated condyle composed chiefly of the basilar portion of that bone. Exterior to the two condyloid pieces, (g, a,) of the occipital are the long slen- der, curved, squamous (/,) and mastoid (m } ) ele- ments of the temporal bone, almost as loose as in serpents, and giving support to the short and moveable tympanic por- tion (r,) of that bone to which the articular portion of the lower jaw is attached. The two parietals (n,) are anchylosed together, as in serpents, and support the posterior edges of the two middle frontals (c, c.) The anterior (e, e,) and the posterior (i, i,) frontals form the upper boundary of the large bird-like orbits. The petrous portion (p 9 p 9 ) of the temporal bone is here the largest and strongest element, extending forwards to the sphenoid (s s ) and backwards to the very long and slender squamous (/,) and mastoid (m,) portions. The two lachrymal bones (/,/,) extend less over the face than in serpents, and between them and the an- terior frontals (e, e 9 ) are the superciliary bones (h, h } ) as in birds. The upper jaw bones (d, d,) and the intermaxillaries (a,) are more fixed than in the former order of reptiles, and these intermaxillaries are often anchylosed together, as are also the two narrow lengthened nasal bones (b.) The large inferior turbinated bones are here exposed, from the small- ness of the anchylosed nasal bone ; the palatine bones are more fixed than in serpents, and are destitute of teeth, and the two pterygoid bones (v,) extend, as in serpents, back- wards and outwards to the tympanic (r.) The lower jaw is divided at the symphysis, and consists on each side of six pieces, of which the anterior or dental portion is the largest, and the prehensile teeth are here as loosely attached by their expanded base to the alveolar flat surface of the jaw, as in serpents, protected at their bases by an outer, and sometimes an interior ridge of the dental bone, but not lodged in separate alveoli. The osseous bases of these teeth in the lizards often anchylose to the surface of the jaws, as in fishes, and the new teeth generally rise up on the inner side of the base of the old or of the lost, and not in the interior of their cavity, as they do in the croco- diles. The ribs of lizards are for the most part rounded and slender, and without the tubercle so much developed in quadrupeds and birds. The scapula is thin, broad, and curved ; the coracoid also terminates in front by a very broad curved margin by which it unites to the large ento- sternal piece. The acromion is a distinct bone of very variable size and form, and the clavicles are anchylosed and extended in form of a cross along the fore part of the ster- num. The sternal elements are thin, soft, and extended transversely, and have chiefly the ento-sternal enlarged and strong, as in birds. The humerus, also as in birds, is much expanded at its upper and lower extremities, the ulna is much stronger than the radius, and distant from it, espe- cially at the carpus. There are nine bones in the carpus, as in tortoises. The three pelvic bones contribute to the formation of the cotyloid cavity for the head of the femur. The expanded edges of the ossa pubis, and ossa ischii meet and form a lengthened symphysis on the median line in front, and the spine of the iliac bones is extended, not for- wards, as in higher classes, but backwards along each side of the sacrum towards the coccygeal vertebrse. The head of the femur is compressed, and bent forward, and the great trochanter is also compressed and turned towards the tibia. The patella is always small, the tibia short, strong, thick at its ends, and much curved at its fibular margin. The fibula is always slender in its middle, apart from the tibia, and thickened at its ends. There are four bones of the tarsus, as in the crocodiles, and the bones of the meta-tarsus like those of the meta-carpus, and the phalanges of the toes and fingers are lengthened to form prehensile flexible mem- bers for climbing in these land forms of saurian rep- tiles. The skeleton of the nilotic crocodiles (Fig. 41.) like that of the gavials and alligators, belongs to reptiles destined to swim through the water by the lateral movements of a powerful muscular vertical tail, and also by the impulse of long webbed feet. Their long bones are coarse in texture, and filled internally with a loose osseous structure contain- ing a thin oily marrow. The whole bones of the head are firmly united together by sutures, so as to admit of no motion on each other. The parietals are anchylosed to- gether, the tympanic bone is fixed by sutures to the other parts of the temporal, and forms a prominent condyle for the lower jaw ; the median frontals are anchylosed together, but the two anterior and the two posterior frontals are detached. The large malar bones, continued from the lachrymal to the temporals, form the outer boundary of the orbits. The nasal bones extend between the upper jaw bones to the intermaxillaries in the crocodiles and alligators ; but in the gavials they extend only to a short distance along the muzzle, so that that lengthened part of the face is not weakened by so many sutures. The whole of the rounded termination of the upper jaw is formed by the in- termaxillaries which surround the nasal aperture. The teeth of these crocodilian sauria are hollow striated cones, which contain within their cavity the new teeth which are to succeed them, and they are firmly lodged in deep alveoli. The vertebrae of the crocodilian animals have for the most part a lengthened narrow body, concave before and convex behind, as in other reptiles. The transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae are very broad and long, and detached like ribs, and impede the lateral movements while they encrease the muscular power of the neck, for carrying off and struggling with their large prey. There are two pairs of false ribs before, and two pairs behind the true ribs. The true ribs have a strong attachment, by fheir lengthened head and prominent tubercle, to the sides of the bodies of the vertebras, and the extremities of their transverse processes. The sternal ribs (Fig. 41. q,) are ossified, and similar ossified ribs are con- tinued along the fore part of the abdomen to the pubis. The scapula and the coracoid bone are separate, more lengthened and narrow than in the lizards, and more thick and solid. The clavicular bone of the lizards is here extended forward below the neck, and the ento- and xiphi-sternal portions are most developed in the sternum. The three pelvic bones are more loose than in other saurians. The short expanded iliac bones (gj) are attached to two broad sacral vertebrae. The ossa ischii (A,) meet in front, and form an expanded symphysis, like most pubic bones ; the pubic bones (i } ) are the most slender, and extend forward from the cotyloid cavity, converg- ing, but without meeting to form a symphysis. The humerus (by) and the femur (#,) are both curved in the direction best calculated to give effect to their movements in the water. The radius (c,) and the ulna (d,) as well as the tibia (/,) and the fibula (m,) are here strong and separate to their extremities, leaving a large interosseous space, and forming a broad and highly moveable articulation at the carpus (e,) and the tarsus (n.) The bones of the meta-carpus, (/,) and meta-tarsus (o,) and the phalanges of the fingers and toes, are long and securely articulated at both ends for their double use in the water and on land. The chelonian reptiles differ from the sauria in having the ribs immoveable, and from the serpents in having arms and legs ; but their skeleton retains the ordinary conditions of that of the class in the coarse fibrous texture of the bones, in the want of continuous cavities in the long bones, and in the permanent separation of the cranial and other osseous elements. The cervical and the coccygeal vertebrae are those which alone are moveable, and nearly throughout the whole column their bodies present the usual concavity at their anterior end, and convex termination behind. The vertebrae of the trunk have a lengthened form, as seen in the caretta caouana (Fig. 42,) and their bodies, their laminae, and their spinous processes are connected only by sutures. There are eight pairs of ribs united to each other by sutures, and attached between the bodies of the vertebrae. By their union with each other, and with the expanded spinous pro- cesses of the dorsal vertebrae, they form the upper shield or carapace. The lower shield, or plastron, is formed by the nine elements of the sternum, and these two parts are attached to each other, by the sternal appendices (&,) which admit of motion in the turtles. The scapulae (a,) are generally cylin- drical bones more or less lengthened, extending from the sides of the first pair of dorsal ver- tebrae to the glenoid ca- vity for the head of the humerus, and they are anchylosed to the cora- coid bones (,) which converge and have their free ends attached to the interior of the ento-sternal bone. The two clavicles (c,) are separated by suture from the scapulae, and are generally flat and expanded at their free extremities, which extend backward and inwards. The ver- tebrae composing the sacrum are anchylosed to each other, and from their sides extend downwards and outwards two short, cylindrical, iliac bones (/,) which enter into the forma- tion of the cotyloid cavity, like the two other pelvic bones, the ossa ischii, which meet in front, as in other reptiles, and the two broad expanded pubic bones (i,) which generally send upwards obliquely a large process like the marsupial bones of mammalia. In the sternum of the land tortoise (Fig. 43. 1.) the nine elements are firmly united to each other by sutures, and also in the same manner to the sternal ribs. The two epi-sternal pieces (a, ,) form the anterior margin, and unite behind with the ento-sternal piece (,) which is single on the median plane, and with the two hyo-sternal pieces (e, c,) which extend laterally to unite with the sternal ribs. The two hyposternal elements (d, d,) are large and broad, like the hyo-ster- nal, and also like them unite laterally with the sternal ribs. The two xiphi-sternal pieces (e, e,) are united to each other, and to the hypo-sternals by serrated sutures, and form the whole posterior termination of the plastron or lower shield. In the sternum of the tur- tles (Fig. 43, 2.) nearly all these elements are moveable on each other, and at their points of contact with the sternal ribs. The two epi-sternals (, #,) taper laterally to a point, and are not united by sutures ; the ento-sternal (#,) has its whole posterior portion free, and although the hyo- (c, c,) and hypo- (d, d,) sternals on each side are united together by firm sutures, they have moveable articulations on their lateral margins. The xiphi-sternals (e, e,) are here freely moveable, and taper to a point posteriorly, like the two epi-sternals. So that there is great solidity in the whole plastron, as in the whole carapace of the land animals to resist pressure, to which they are much exposed, and they form a dense frame-work for their muscular movements on the land, while there is great mobility in the sternal apparatus of the aquatic species, for the extensive respiration which they require in that dense element. The bones of the head in the chelonia, like those of the crocodiles, are immoveably united by sutures, and in place of teeth there are strong cutting, horny plates covering the alveolar surface of the jaws, as in birds. The occipital condyle is composed of three distinct facets, formed by the basilar and the two condyloid portions of that bone. The superior median portion of the occipital extends backwards in form of a long spinous process, as in most osseous fishes, for the attachment of the powerful muscles of the neck. The two parietal bones are separate, and form in the tortoises of the land an elevated longitudinal ridge, which is continued forwards over the cranium to the frontal bone. In the marine turtles, and in the fresh -water emydes, as seen in the skull of the emys expansa (Fig. 44. h, h,) the parietal bones rise upwards on the median line of the head, and extend laterally over the temporal fossa. The tympanic bones are large, fixed by suture as in the croco- diles, and extend downwards to form a condyle for the articular cavity of the lower jaw. The two posterior (g, g,) and the two middle frontals bound the orbits above, and the two malar bones (i, i,) behind. The two anterior frontals (a, a,) bound the orbits in front, and expand over the nasal aperture, like nasal bones. The inter- maxillaries are narrow, vertical, with an extensive palatine surface, and like the superior maxillaries, they present a sharp alveolar edge, which is covered with the cutting, horny, superior mandible. Behind the two jugal bones (i, i,) are the expanded squamous portions (k, k,) of the temporals, and behind these the two long, descending, mastoid bones (m, m.) Anterior to the mastoid bones (m* m,) are the upper portions of the tym- panic bones (r, r.) Two portions (o, o,) detached from the condyloid elements (q, q,) of the occipitals, are termed ex- terior occipitals by Cuvier. The ossicula auditus are an- chylosed together, as in many of the lower vertebrata. The symphysis of the lower jaw is anchylosed at a very early period of growth, as in birds. From the importance of the os hyoides in the motions of respiration in these animals, where the ribs are fixed,, its body and cornua are very large and strong. The arms of the tortoise are fixed in a state of pronation, to' strengthen them for the support of the heavy trunk ; and, like those of the legs, all their bones are short and massive in their proportions. The humerus is much bent, the radius and ulna short, strong, and with a very broad articular surface at the carpus, and the succeeding bones of the hands are short and almost cubical, for support and for digging, like those of the mole. The same proportions are observed in the bones of the posterior extremities, but the outer toe is generally quite rudimentary, while the five fingers are more equally developed on the hands. In the aquatic chelonia the bones of the extremities have a more lengthened, straight, and slender form, and especially of the anterior extremities (Fig. 42,) which are much more developed than the posterior. They are also more flat and compressed, and less moveable on each other ; so that they form a near approach to the condition of these bones in the arms of a cetaceous animal, or in the arms and legs of an ichthyo- saurus and a plesiosaurus. The humerus (Fig. 42. d,) the radius (e,) and the ulna (/,) the bones of the carpus (ff } ) and even those of the meta-carpus, and the phalanges of the fingers (h,) partake of this lengthened and flattened form, the best adapted for progressive motion through the water. And we observe the same character, though to a less extent, in the femur (m,) the tibia (n,) and the fibula (o,) and in the bones of the tarsus (p,) the meta-tarsus, and the phalanges of the toes (q,) where all the parts are shorter than the corresponding bones of the anterior extremities. XXII. Aves. The bones of birds are more compact, white, dense, and brittle than those of any other class ; they have thinner parietes, their internal cavities are pro- portionally larger, and for the most part they contain air in place of marrow. From the great extent of their res- piration, and the consequent encreased energy of all their functions, ossification proceeds in birds to the greatest ex- tent, not only in the consolidation of the several pieces of the skeleton, but in the anchylosis of the separate elements and separate bones with each other, throughout the skeleton, and in the consolidation, by phosphate of lime, of cartilagi- nous and tendinous parts, not ossified in other classes. In the young state the bones of birds are filled with a thin serous marrow, like those of reptiles, and this is displaced by the admission of air during growth, to a very variable extent, in the different orders of this class, the air being admitted most extensively in the high flying rapacious birds, and least in the heavy swimming palmipeds. There is greater uniformity in the skeleton of this, than of the other ver- tebrated classes. The arms are here adapted solely for flight, the legs for support, and the head and neck are long and extensively moveable, as organs of prehension ; hence the peculiar forms presented by these regions of the skeleton in birds, as seen in the skeleton of the griffon vulture, vultur fulvus, (Fig. 45.) As the body is supported wholly on the legs, the toes extend to a great length, to afford a broad base, the legs are placed forwards upon the sides of the pelvis, the trunk is in- clined backwards upon these organs of support ; the neck and head are proportionally elongated, to reach the food upon the ground, and the arms and hands are folded longitu- dinally along the sides of the trunk, as in the bats. The trunk of birds is almost as fixed as that of a tortoise, to give strength to the muscles em- ployed in flight, and the ver- tebrae of the neck and tail are almost alone moveable. The rapid ossification and anchylosis here affects not only the bones of the skull, but the whole bones of the pelvis, the lower jaw, the scapular arch, the clavicles, and the sternum. This tendency to ossification affects the sterno-costal cartilages, the tendons of the muscles of the legs, the sclerotic coat of the eye, the rings of the trachea, and the inferior larynx. The vertebrae of the neck are always more numerous than in the mammalia, and are sometimes more than three times the number common to that class. They have their articu- lar surfaces so directed that the neck is naturally concave in front at the upper part, and convex in front at the lower part, presenting more or less of that sigmoid curviture, which is so conspicuous in the long-necked 'birds. The oblique processes, as seen in those of the swan, (Fig. 46. h 9 hj) are generally long, narrow, and diverging, admitting with safety of very extensive motion. The spinous pro- cesses (i, i,) are very short, to offer no obstruction to the movements of the neck. The transverse processes are short, and strong, and give passage to a large foramen (c, c,) on each side, for the vertebral arteries and nerves. The foramen for the spinal chord is dilated at its anterior and posterior extremity, in the direction of the greatest motion of the vertebrae, in order to protect from compres- sion the spinal chord, and the nerves which enter it laterally. The posterior ends of the bodies of the vertebrae (#, ,) are nar- row, convex, arched transversely, and received into a corresponding transverse groove on the anterior part of the body of the next succeeding vertebrae. The trans- verse processes are prolonged so far backwards (g, y,) as almost to form a continuous canal along the sides of the neck, for the protection of the enclosed large vertebral arteries, and the cervi- cal portion of the sympathetic nerves. The forms of the pro- cesses, and of the articulations of the dorsal vertebrae are calcu- lated by every means but by anchylosis to impede motion and to give solidity to that part of the trunk. The spinous processes of these vertebrae are developed forwards and backwards to such an extent that they come almost into contact with each other before and behind. The free ends of the transverse processes extend so much forwards and backwards that they commonly pass over each other in an imbricated manner, and prevent ah 1 lateral motion. And the anterior or sternal surface of the bodies of these verte- brae are often compressed, carinated, and extended down- wards, like inferior spinous processes, which further impede motion. The dorsal vertebrae are often anchylosed toge- ther, like all the lumbar and sacral, to give greater solidity to the trunk, for the movements of flying. The lumbar vertebrae are most free in the ostrich ; in other birds they are anchylosed to each other and to the sacral, as the sacral are to each other and to the iliac bones ; so that the different kinds of vertebrae in this region of the trunk are almost indistinguishable from each other, and the sacral vertebrae are more numerous than in all other forms of ver- tebrata. The canal for the spinal chord in the middle of the sacrum, between the two cotyloid cavities, where the nerves of the posterior extremities commence, is very wide, and corresponds with the great inferior enlargement of the spinal chord at that place. In the intervals between the transverse processes of the sacral vertebrae are contained internally on each side the several unequal lobes of the kidneys. The coccygeal vertebrae are moveable and strong in birds, to support the plumage and muscles of this great and flexible organ of motion. They have long transverse processes, and spinous processes both above and below the bodies, and the last of the vertebrae (Fig. 45. g.} has a lengthened, compressed, crescentic form, to increase the ex- tent of its lateral surfaces. The lengthened form of the head in birds depends chiefly on the elongation of the jaws, and corresponds with the lengthened form of the neck, and the various manipulations and prehensile uses to which this part is applied. The cranium is short 'and broad, like that of most cetacea ; it is bounded before by very large orbits, separated from each other only by a thin membranous partition, or by a thin plate of the sphenoid bone, and the bones which form it are anchylosed together, so that all traces of the coronal, sagittal, lamdoidal, squamous, and other su- tures have here disappeared, as seen in the skull of the golden eagle, falco fulvus (Fig. 47.) The occipital (a,) the parietal (b } ) the frontal (e,) and the temporal bones are for the most part thin, diaphanous, smooth externally and internally, like the surface of the cere- bral hemisphere, and embrace a large lobed cerebellum, large optic lobes, and smooth hemispheres of the brain, which taper forwards to the ethmoid bone. The nasal (/,) and the superior maxillary bones (g 9 ) are moveable on the frontals, sometimes by a distinct articulation, as in the parrots and cockatoos, but most generally by means of the thin flexible condition of these bones at their line of junction 5 and by this the gape of birds is widened, to take in or seize bulky objects, which their toothless jaws and the form of their hands do not enable them to subdivide. The basilar part of the occipital bone is short, from the shortness of the cranical cavity, as in reptiles, amphibia, and cetacea, and it extends backwards in the form of a single, round, prominent con- dyle, by which greater extent of rotation is afforded to the head on the neck. The body of the sphenoid is lengthened, as in the inferior vertebrata, and the two pterygoid bones still remain permanently detached, extending laterally to the loose tympanic bones (/.) The tympanic element of the temporal bone, or the os quadratum (/,) is here freely move- able, as in fishes, amphibia, and most sauria ; it sends downwards a convex, prominent, articular surface, for the attachment of the lower jaw, and is likewise attached to the long, slender, malar bone (n,) which forms the inferior boun- dary of the orbit, by which attachment it is enabled to push forwards and upwards the superior maxiUary, and thus widen the mouth. The palatine bones are long, large, and detached, leaving a wide fissure between them ; but the in- termaxillaries are anchylosed to each other, and to the superior jaw bones, which are also united to each other. On the anterior part of the orbits, the large lachrymal bones (e 9 ) and the small superciliary bones (d,) are detached, especially in the rapacious birds ; and, notwithstanding the wide openings of the nostrils externally, the turbinated la- minee are small, soft, and cartilaginous ; the olfactory nerves are transmitted through the back part of the large orbits to the nose, there being no perforation for these nerves in the thin cancellated structure of the ethmoid and sphenoid bones separating the orbits, and here filled with air. The diploe of the cranium, which is largely developed in noc- turnal birds, as owls, is filled with air, like the bones of the trunk and of the extremities, which is admitted through the Eustachean tube, and the cavity of the tympanum ; so that it encreases the intensity of sounds and the dimensions of the organs of hearing. No parts of the skeleton vary so much in birds, as the upper and lower jaws, according to the kind of food on which the different species subsist and their modifications are therefore intimately connected with the general forms of the skeleton, and the living habits of the species. The tipper bill is long and hooked in fishing birds, shorter in vultures, and still shorter in eagles and hawks. The jaws are long, straight, tapering, and pointed in herons and storks, shorter and slender in wood-peckers, and still more slender and pointed in insectivorous singing birds. They are long and curved in the ibises, and curlews, and humming birds, short, conical and strong in the gallin- aceous and granivorous birds, and still shorter and stronger in the parrots and cockatoos, to break the hard nuts on which they feed. They are flat and depressed, and generally with serrated margins in the mallards, and ducks, and swans, flatter in the spoon-bills, and still broader in the pelicans. With these forms of the bills and jaws, correspond especially the forms of the digestive organs, and the claws of the feet, as the analogous parts correspond with the forms of the teeth in quadrupeds. From the length and varied uses of the tongue in birds, the elements of the os hyoides are much extended longitu- dinally, especially its cornua, or cerato-hyal portions, which are often extended so far backwards that they rise upwards behind the occipital bone, and arch forwards over the skull. The lingual portions of the os hyoides, the basi-hyal, and the glosso-hyal elements are also lengthened, like the tongue and the whole face of these animals. There are in birds, as in the inferior vertebrated classes, and as in some of the mammalia, false ribs, anterior as well as posterior to the true ribs. The ribs are here broad and compressed, securely articulated to the vertebrae by their long head arid long tubercle, and they have generaUy a process extending up- wards and backwards from their posterior margin, especially those placed towards the middle of the trunk. At their vertebral extremity the ribs are compressed from before backwards, so as to present their sharp edge to the cavity of the trunk ; and at their sternal end they are compressed in the opposite direction, so as to present their broad con- cave surface to the interior of the body. The sternal ex- tremities of the true ribs are united by cartilage to the ends of the sternal ribs, or ossified sterno-costal cartilages ; and it is at this articulation that ' the most extensive motions take place during respiration. The broad and thick anterior ends of the sternal ribs are received into deep articular cavities on the sides of the sternum, and principally of the hyo-sternal portions of that bone, and they move freely and securely in these sternal cavities. The sternum in birds, as in chelonia, covers the greater part of the anterior surface of the trunk, and presents, excepting in the strutheous birds, an elevated, median, longitudinal, external crest, which greatly extends the surface for the attachment of the pectoral muscles. Its elements are anchylosed together, like those of the cranium and pelvis in the adult ; but at an early period the rudiments of nine elements can be detected in its composition, which are generally disposed as repre- sented in that of the peacock, pavo cristatus, (Fig. 48,) although they vary much in their relative development in different species. The two epi- sternal pieces (/,) are small, compressed, anchylosed portions, which rise FIG upwards between the two coracoid bones (c y ) behind the united clavicles (/*,) and are ossified to the upper edge of the large and long ento-sternal element (o,) which is the largest element of the sternum, and that which has to sustain almost the entire force of the pectoral muscles during flight. The ento-sternal piece (o,) forms the crest of the sternum, which is hollow and open above in many aquatic birds, to admit a turn of the trachea, and is thick and solid in the strong- est rapacious birds ; it admits air into its interior by aper- tures on its inner and upper part, and it receives the arti- cular surfaces of the two coracoid bones (c y ) at its upper edge. The two lateral portions (m,) which give attachment to the sternal ribs (s, s,) are the hyo-sternal elements, which are very large in the ostrich. Extending downwards and backwards from the posterior margin of the hyo-sternal element (m,) is a long narrow bone, generally bifurcated in the gallinaceous birds (n,) which is analogous to the hypo- sternal portion of this bone in the chelonian reptiles ; it is more extensively developed in the water birds, and most of all in the raptorial species, where it forms a continuous piece with the lower end of the ento-sternal. The small tapering terminal cartilage of the sternum, continued from the posterior end of the ento-sternal portion (o,) is com- posed of the two xiphi-sternal elements (q,) analagous to the xiphoid cartilage of the human sternum. The scapular arch is very strong in birds, to form a solid resisting fulcrum for the powerful movements of the humerus ; and the -mag- nitude and strength of these bones corresponds in the dif- ferent species with the power of flight, or the resistance they have to oppose to the pectoral muscles on the one side, and the branchial on the other. The scapulae (Fig. 49. a, a,) are long, curved, compressed bones, extending along the back, on each side of the dorsal vertebrae ; they become more narrow and rounded as they approach the glenoid cavity, where they suddenly expand to enlarge that cavity (b^ and they are partially anchylosed at that place to the large and strong cora- coid bones (c, k.) The two coracoid bones (k, k y ) extend from the articular cavity (c,) for the head of the humerus downwards and inwards, to rest their broad expanded base (i,) in a deep groove on each side of the anterior margin of the ento-sternal bone. These coracoid bones almost alone resist the approximation of the humeri on the median plane, and their descent in the direction of the pectoralis major on each side, and they have generally more than double the thickness and strength of the scapulae. The two clavicles (d, d,) descend converging from the upper or humeral ends of the coracoid bones (c,) and they are anchylosed together at their lower ends (e,) where they commonly present a flat compressed prominence (/,) connected by cartilage, by tendinous expansions, or sometimes by anchylosis, with the anterior projecting point of the crest of the sternum (g.) The clavicles are very thick and strong, and meet at an obtuse rounded angle in the most powerful of the rapacious birds, and are long, thin, and slender, and meet at an acute angle in the gallinaceous and other birds of feeble flight. In the ostrich the clavicles are very small and short, and disunited on the median plane, as in mammalia. In the arm of the bird there is a great development of the proximate bones, which by their magnitude and strength are best able to withstand the re- sistance to which they are so frequently opposed, while the more delicate and the more distant bones of the hand are few and less perfectly developed. The humerus (Fig. 45. e,) has a broad, compressed, and curved head, the large articular surface of which plays freely in the shallow glenoid cavity formed by the scapular and coracoid bones. In the con- cavity at the back part of the head of the humerus, are the large apertures by which the air from the axillary cells gains admission into the capacious interior cavity of this bone. The distal extremity of the humerus is curved forwards, and presents a broad articular surface with a double condyle, on which chiefly rotates the large ulna (Fig. 45. h,) the radius being a more slender bone. The radius and the ulna are so articulated as to resist pronation and supination of the hand, these motions being partially admitted at the head of the humerus. The arm of the bird is fixed in a state of pronation, the position best suited to strike the air with effect, and the hand moves upon the arm, not in the common mode of flexion and extension, but by abduction and adduction. At the ex- tremity of the radius (Fig. 50. ,) and the ulna (b,) there are two carpal bones (c, ?,) which are succeeded by a single long meta- carpal bone (y,} composed of three pieces an- chylosed together. One of these pieces (e,) on the radial side of the hand is very short, and supports the single small phalanx of the radial or fore finger (h.) The middle meta-carpal piece (/*,) is by much the largest, and supports at its extremity generally three phalanges of the middle finger (k, I, m,) the last of which is very short and slender. The first phalanx (k,) of the middle finger has a flat compressed form, like the meta-carpal bone. At the ulnar side of the distal termination of the meta-car- pal bone is a small single phalanx of the outer or little finger (i,) which is more immediately connected with the exterior slender portion (g,) of the meta-carpal bone. When in a state of rest the hand of the bird is folded along the exterior edge of the ulna, and the large primary feathers are thus extended along the sides of the trunk to the tail. These fingers appear to be the analogues of the three middle fingers of the human hand, and there is sometimes a single phalanx covered with a spur on the radial side of these three fingers of the hand of the bird. The bones of the pelvis, though anchylosed into a single piece, consist of the ordinary three elements on each side, as seen in that of the wild swan, (Fig. 51.) The two iliac bones (a,) still extend forwards and backwards from the cotyloid cavity along the sides of the sacrum, as in the saurian reptiles ; and, as they are anchylosed to that bone, the sacro-iliac articulation is here of great extent and secu- rity. The iliac bones anchylose behind with the two ischia (b,) and the sacro-sciatic notch of mammalia is converted into a fora- men (/,) but in the os- trich it is a notch open behind, as in most quad- rupeds. The ossa ischii are anchylosed at the cotyloid cavity (/,) with the pubic bones (c,) and the three pelvic bones enter into the composition of that cavity for the head of the femur, as in other classes. The pelvic bones are lengthened backwards, and taper downwards thin and elastic to the anterior part of the pubis, where the two pubic bones (d, d,) are separate and free at the symphysis, excepting in the ostrich, where they are united by sychon- drosis, as in mammalia. The obturator foramen (i,) has here a long and narrow form, corresponding with the length- ened form of all the bones of the pelvis. The pubic bones are here free and elastic at their anterior terminations (d, d,) that they may be susceptible of the necessary dilation, when the large, brittle, and inflexible eggs are passing out through the cloaca, and also to afford the necessary support to the contents of the pelvis. The cotyloid cavities (Fig. 51./ 5 ) are generally complete foramina, without an interior osseous septum, and they are placed far forwards upon the pelvis, in order to be more under the centre of gravity, to poise alone the entire trunk. The posterior extremities having more of the ordinary use of these members in other animals than the anterior, have their osseous elements constructed more according to the normal character and number of these parts in other vertebrated classes. The head of the femur is small, short, and rounded,, with a very short cervix, and projects at a right angle a little lower than the trochanter major, which here forms an extensive arch from before backwards. The femur (Fig. 45. v,) in birds is generally very short and strong compared with the succeeding bones of the leg, even in the long-legged grallatores, and the running birds. The air is admitted into this hollow bone, by a large aperture on the fore part of the trochanter major. Between the two prominent sharp condyles of the femur and the upper end of the long tibia is placed the patella, as in quadrupeds. At the upper and outer part of this long and strong tibia (Fig. 45. w,) is a small, imperfectly formed fibula, thin, tapering, and anchylosed to the tibia at its lower part, and separate above ; sometimes it is separate throughout. The lower part of the tibia presents a broad, expanded, articular sur- face for the succeeding long bone of the meta-tarsus, which is single, like the meta-carpal bone of the hand. There is a small tarsal bone in the ostrich, which thus leads to the structure of this part in the lowest ruminantia. The tibia and the meta-tarsal bone are long in most birds, but especially in the wading birds, as cranes and storks. The meta-tarsal bone (Fig. 52. ,) has two articular depressions at its upper part, for the two inferior condyles of the tibia, and at its lower end it commonly pre- sents three pulley-like articular prominences (b,) for the attachment of the three toes, which are directed forwards. It resembles that of the jerboa among the rodentia. There is generally at the inner and back part of this bone another very small meta- tarsal bone (,) for the attachment of the toe which is directed backwards. The outer toe of birds has five phalanges (1 . d,) the second has four phalanges (2. e,) the third has three (3 /,) the inner toe directed backwards has two phalanges (4. ff 9 ) and the spur seen in the male of many gallinaceous birds is supported by a single osseous phalanx (5.) Where there are only three toes, as in the rhea, and emu, and cas- sowary, the inner toe has three phalanges, and the outer still five ; and in the ostrich, where there are only two toes, the inner toe has four phalanges, and the outer five, as in other birds ; so that the toes are here deficient on the inner, and not on the outer side of the foot where the number of the phalanges remains uniformly the same. In wood-peckers, parrots, cockatoos, and other zygodactylous birds, the outer and the inner toes are both directed backwards, the better to assist in climbing, and consequently one of these has five phalanges, and the other only two. XXIII. Mammalia. The bones of mammalia are inter- mediate in density and compactness of texture, and in the extent of their anchylosis between those of birds and those of reptiles. They have generally thick and solid parietes traversed by numerous sutures, which have disappeared in birds, and in the interior of the long bones are large cavities filled with marrow, which in birds are filled with air, and in reptiles with a cancellated structure. The most imperfect forms of the skeleton are presented by the ceta- ceous mammalia, where the vertebral column, as in fishes, is the chief organ of progressive motion, and almost alone developed. They have no sacrum, nor pelvic extremities, and their cervical vertebrae are more or less anchylosed to- gether. Their long bones are almost in the condition of those of reptiles, filled with a loose, internal, cancellated structure, containing a thin, serous, or oily marrow, and all their bones have a coarse, fibrous structure compared with those of land mammalia. The head is still extended in a straight line with the vertebral column, the arms are con- structed for swimming, and the tail is expanded horizon- tally, for the vertical movements of the body, required by their aerial respiration, as seen in the skeleton of the por- poise (Fig. 53.) The bodies of the vertebrae terminate in flat surfaces, united to each other by an elastic, fibro-cartila- ginous, interposed substance, which admits of the necessary movements by means of its compressibility. The terminal flat portions of the bodies of the vertebra remain long, se- parate, as detached pieces, in these animals. The cervical vertebrae are sometimes all anchylosed together, and in the herbivorous cetacea, where the neck is longer and more moveable, ah 1 the cervical vertebrse are larger, and detached from each other. In the preserved skeletons of the laman- tine there are but six cervical vertebrse. The spinous pro- cesses extending upwards from the dorsal and coccygeal vertebrae (h, h, h } ) are here long and strong, and often sup- port a cartilaginous hunch upon the back, in form of a ver- tical fin (i } ) and inferior spinous processes are developed below the coccygeal vertebrae, for the protection of the great blood-vessels. The transverse processes are also long, for the attachment of powerful muscles, and they limit the ex- tent of lateral motion in the column. Many of the last coccygeal vertebrae (u y ) have only their round bodies developed, and admit of free and extensive motion in every direction. The anterior part of the thorax is the most fixed, to give at- tachment to the powerful muscles of the neck and of the arms, and the ribs are there attached both to the bodies and to the transverse processes of the vertebrae ; but on the pos- terior part of the thorax, where there is greater freedom of motion, the ribs are attached only to the ends of the long transverse processes. There are no bones extending into the fin-like cartilaginous hunch (i,) upon the back, nor into the lateral cartilaginous expansions of the tail (v,) as we find in these parts in fishes. The sternum is very short, and confined to the anterior ribs, and the sternal ribs are gene- rally ossified, as in many other quadrupeds, and in birds, and in many reptiles. Although there are no legs, we always find here two lengthened slender pelvic bones, unconnected with the rest of the skeleton, and having the rib-like form of the iliac bones of fishes and amphibia. The head is most lengthened, straight, and fish-like in the piscivorous cetacea, as the porpoise (Fig. 53,) where the face is chiefly composed of the long maxillary and inter- maxillary bones, (,) and the vomer, which is extended between them. The small nasal bones are placed far back- wards upon the forehead, behind the nasal apertures, and behind them is the narrow band of the frontal bone, which is in contact with the occipital, from the parietals being confined to the temporal region of the head. From the great extent and the vertical position of the occipital bone, and the extension of the maxillary bones upon the forehead, the cranium is here generally small, compared with the face, and is much extended transversely ; great extent of surface for muscular attachment is thus given to the back part of the head, and great development to the jaws in front, for pre- hension. The teeth, like those of fishes and reptiles, are adapted for prehension, and not for mastication ; they are similar in form, conical, bent, and placed alternately in the opposite jaws. In the cachalots, they are present only in the lower jaws, which are very narrow, and in contact with each other throughout the greater part of their course, and thus are opposed only to the middle part of the roof of the mouth. In the foetus of the balsena there are teeth in the lower jaws, which soon entirely disappear, and the alveolar margin of the upper jaws are occupied with vertical, long, thin, horny laminae, which are fimbriated on their inner edges, and by straining the water, they collect the small floating animals on which the whales feed. The malar bone forms the lower boundary of their very small orbit (f,) and is here a remarkably thin, slender, and curved bone, com- pared with the massive malar bone of the herbivorous spe- cies, which require a more powerful masseter for mastication. The petrous and tympanic portions of the temporal bone, though anchylosed together, are connected only by cartilage to the other bones of the skull, the ethmoid bone presents no cribriform plate, and the infraorbitary foramen is divided into a series of small apertures extending forwards along the upper jaw-bones. The right side of the head is generally more developed than the other, and the nostrils are inclined thus to the left side. The arms of these cetacea are moved in a piece, as fins, and the articulations of the several bones, especially of the hand, are very imperfectly formed. There is no clavicle, but the great expansion of the scapula (Fig. 53. n,) presents a large surface for the powerful muscles of the humerus, by which the arm is chiefly moved, the suc- ceeding bones being scarcely moveable on each other in the living state. The humerus (o,) has a large round head, but is compressed at its lower end, like that of a turtle, and the same compressed form is seen in the radius (p,) and the ulna (q,) and in the detached round bones of the carpus (r,) the meta-carpus, and the phalanges of the five fingers (*, t.) In the herbivorous cetacea, as in the dugong (Fig. 54,) we find a much nearer approach, in many parts of the skeleton, to the ordinary condition of these parts in the land quad- rupeds, than in the piscivorous tribes, especially in the forms of the jaws and teeth, in the cervical vertebra, and in the whole bones of the arms. The cervical vertebrae (a,) are here detached and moveable on each other, and the neck is thus longer and more flexible. The occipital bone (#,) rises to a much less extent upon the cranium and its ele- ments, like those of most of the other bones, remain long disunited. The cranical cavity is smaller considerably than in the former group. All the sutures of the cranium re- main very loose, and the petrous and tympanic portions of the temporal bone are permanently detached from the squa- mous, as in the other cetacea. The frontals are divided by a continuation of the sagittal suture ; the malar or jugal bones (/,) are here of great size and strength, the jaws are of great depth, for the long molares, with flat crowns adapted to their vegetable food, and the intermaxillary bones ( g,) are of great size, for the long and large incisors (h,) which they contain. The lachrymal bone forms a small portion of the margin of the orbit, and is interposed between the anterior end of the jugal bone and the malar process of the frontal. The muzzle is straight in the predaceous tribes (Fig. 53. #,#,) and thus directed to the prey, which floats or swims in the water ; but in the herbivorous cetacea it is bent down to the fuci, which are attached to the bottom of the sea. As the neck is here more lengthened and moveable, the trunk is more fixed in its condition by the development of the sternum and of more numerous and larger ribs, the pelvic arch is more complete, and the inferior spinous processes of the coccygeal vertebrae are larger and stronger. The whole bones of the arms are constructed more according to their normal forms in the land mammalia, and these animals are able to clamber upon rocks on the sea shore, like seals and walruses, and to ma- nipulate their young while suckling at their pectoral mammae. The scapula (o,) is more narrow and lengthened, the hu- merus (q,) is longer and more cylindrical than in the blow- ing cetacea, and the radius (/?,) and ulna (r,) have a more lengthened and rounded form, and admit of more extensive motion at both extremities. The forms and articulations are more complete, and admit of freer motion in all the bones of the carpus (s } ) and meta-carpus, and in the pha- langes of the fingers (u) ; so that the hands possess much more prehensile power in the herbivorous than in the pisci- vorous cetacea. The skeletons of ruminating quadrupeds still present many marks of an inferior grade of development, when compared with carnivorous and higher orders of mammalia, especially in the small size of the cranial cavity, compared with the face, in the deficiency of teeth in the jaws, in the want of clavicles, and in the imperfect condition of the arms and legs, and of the hands and feet, as seen in the skeleton of the fossil elk (Fig. 55.) Their frontal bone, which ge- nerally develops horns from its tuberosities, is divided by a longitudinal suture, and the parietals are anchylosed toge- ther, to consolidate the skull behind. The tuberosities of the frontal bones in the males of most genera of this order, extend upwards into permanent processes, of a loose can- cellated structure, which are covered with permanent, horny, and extravascular sheaths, as in antelopes, sheep, goats and oxen. In the deers the antlers are deciduous, organized osseous processes, continued from the same tuberosities of the frontal bones, with thick, dense, and very compact pa- rieties, and a softer internal core passing through all the branches. These deciduous horns, which are diverticula of the blood at stated seasons, and intimately connected in their development with the condition of the genital system, are annually cast and renewed, each successive pair being larger and more complex in form than the preceding. There are permanent rudimentary osseous horns in the giraffe, together with a median frontal eminence, like that on the frontal bone of the two-horned rhinoceros ; but there are no horns in the camels, dromedaries, lamas, pacas, and musk-deers, where there are canine teeth, and they are wanting in the females of most ruminantia. The orbits are thrown to the sides of the head by the great development of the frontal bones, which are chiefly occupied with air ; from the large sinuses, they communicate with the tem- poral fosse, but have a complete osseous margin by the extension downwards of the malar process of the frontal to the jugal bone. The lachrymal bone extends downwards over the face, to assist in lengthening the head, the alveolar portions of the jaws are deep, for the long malar teeth, and the broad nasal bones cover a large and long nasal cavity. The turbinated bones are of great size, the malar bone is prolonged over the face, the zygomatic arch is very small, and has the coracoid process of the lower jaw extended to a great height through it, which limits the lateral motion of the lower jaw during mastication. The long slender inter- maxillary bones are generally destitute of teeth, the malar teeth with oblique crowns have the layers of enamel directed longitudinally, the motion of the lower jaw being from side to side. The lower jaw being much narrower than the upper, the lateral motion is required to bring the teeth into apposition for mastication, and the glenoid and condyloid surfaces are therefore flat, to admit of this extensive motion. The cervical vertebrae (Fig. 55. c,) are of a lengthened form, with short processes, to give length and mobility to the neck, and the spinous processes of the dorsal vertebrae (c?,) are long, for the attachment and support of the long neck and often weighty head. The ribs extend over a great part of the trunk (z 9 ) and the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae are of great length, to assist in the support of the heavy abdominal viscera. The pelvis (p,) is lengthened backwards, the sacro-iliac articulation (n,) is more or less oblique, to give greater elasticity to the movements of the legs, and the coccygeal vertebrae (o,) are numerous and highly moveable, the tail being generally employed as a hand, to brush away insects from the surface of the body. The anterior part of the thorax, destitute of clavicles, is so com- pressed that several of the first pairs of ribs are almost straight, by which the arms are approximated and brought more nearly under the centre of gravity of the heavy trunk, from which they would have been thrown out and endangered by the interposition of clavicles. The elements of the sternum (y,) placed in a line, are extended longitudinally, like the ribbed part of the trunk, and are generally narrow and compressed laterally. The long narrow scapulae (e,) have scarcely the rudiments of the acromion and coracoid processes developed. The humerus (/,) and the femur (q,) are generally short and strong bones, much inclined from the vertical position, es- pecially in the lighter and nimbler forms of this order. The secure articulations of the long radius (h,) and tibia (s,) admit of free flexion and extension, but are fixed in a state of pronation. The imperfect ulna is anchylosed below to the back part of the radius, and consists chiefly of an elon- gated olecranon (g,) to secure the elbow joint and afford a strong attachment to the extensor muscles of the arm. At the lower end of the radius are found the four usual small carpal bones of the first row separate, and the four of the second row are here generally anchylosed into two pieces (i,) which form the articulation with the long single meta-carpal bone (k.) This broad meta-carpal, like the compressed meta-tarsal bone, consisted in the foetus of two separate bones, and it retains, in the adult state, longitudinal median grooves before and behind, which mark the line of original separation. There are often likewise the slender rudiments of two other meta- carpal and two meta-tarsal bones seen, one on each side of these long anchylosed bones of the meta-carpus (k,) and metatarsus (t?,) and the rudiments of two corresponding toes are found at the sides of all the feet. There are two long pulley-like articular condyles at the lower end of the meta-carpal bone, and there are three phalanges on each of the two toes prolonged to the ground. The trochanter major is large, and elevated on the strong and short femur (q) ; the long and strong tibia (s,) forms the whole articulation with the femur and with the astragulus (u,) and fibula forms only a small splint. The calcaneum (/,) extends upwards in the elevated heel, like the olcranon ( ^,) at the elbow. Besides the astragulus and calcaneum, there are generally two cuneiform bones, and a compound cubo-scaphoid bone in the tarsus of ruminantia ; but there is one more bone in the camel, as in the tarsus of the solidungulous pachyderma. The long, anchylosed, compound meta-tarsal bone (v,) is more compressed and narrow than the corresponding broad and flattened meta-carpal (&,) of the hand, and has attached to its inferior pulley-like articular processes two toes (l,m } ) prolonged to the ground, which like the fingers of the hands, have three phalanges in each. Great elasticity is given to the extremities in the ruminating quadrupeds by the alternately inclined direction of most of the bones, and great security is given to the articulations by the pulley-like form of nearly all the joints. The skeletons of the pachyderma, like those of rumi- nating quadrupeds, have no clavicles, and have the jaws and teeth adapted for vegetable food ; the articulations are con- structed generally for limited, slow, and secure movements, and the bones are more strong and massive in their pro- portions. The nearest approach to the ruminating form of the skeleton is that of the solidungulous quadrupeds, where we observe, as in the camels, three kinds of teeth in the jaws. The jaws and face are there lengthened to reach the turf, and the upper and lower maxillary bones are of great depth, to lodge the long prismatic, quadrangular molar teeth. The cranial cavity is small, as in all the pachyderma, and the orbits are surrounded with an osseous ring, as in the ruminantia. The transverse ridge of the occipital bone is much elevated, for the attachment of the strong muscles and ligaments of the neck. By the great development of the interposed bones, the orbits are thrown to the extreme lateral points of the head, and directed to the sides. The ethmoid bone presents internally two large and deep fossae for the olfactory tubercles, and the turbinated bones pre- sent a very extensive surface, for the distribution of the first pair of nerves. In their long neck, their long spinous pro- cesses of the dorsal vertebrae, the compressed form of the tho- rax, the lengthened form of the bones of the scapular and pelvic arches and of their extremities, they more approach to the ruminantia than to the ordinary short and massive forms of the pachyderma, and the anchylosis which extends in the ruminating quadrupeds only through the inferior row of the carpal and tarsal, and through the meta-carpal and meta- tarsal bones, is here continued downwards through the pha- langes of the two middle fingers and toes to the extremity of the hands and feet. In most of the ordinary pachyderma, as the pecari, the babyrussa, the tapir, the hippopotamus, and the rhinoceros the back part of the skull presents an elevated transverse ridge, and a broad surface of attachment for the muscles and liga- ments of their heavy head and strong neck, the head being sometimes employed in digging, as in the hog tribe, or to support a strong instrument of defence, as in the rhino- ceros, or being proportionally large and weighty, as in the hippopotamus. The air is admitted from the frontal sinuses over a large portion of the diploe in the babyrussae and other animals of the hog tribe, to extend the external sur- face without adding to the weight of the head, as we see to a much greater extent in the huge head of the elephant. All the processes of the cervical vertebrse are here more strongly developed than in the long flexible neck of the ru- minantia, and the spinous processes of the dorsal vertebrse are lengthened and strong, and generally terminated by round tubercles. The scapula is generally broader at its vertebral margin, and the strong pelvic arch is more vertical in its direction. The extremities are generally shorter and more massive, and the separate bones more completely formed than in the former groups of quadrupeds, the ulna and the fibula being developed throughout, and four toes, at least, generally reaching the ground on all the extremities. As the kind of vegetable food varies much more here than in the ruminating quadrupeds, there is a greater diversity in the forms of the teeth, and of the jaws, and of many other parts of the skeleton. The general forms and proportions of the bones most common in the ordinary pachyderma are seen in the massive skeleton of the rhinoceros ( Fig. 56, ) where the head and neck are more lengthened than in the proboscidian tribe, and the trunk is almost en- tirely encompassed by large and broad ribs. The fore part of the head presents an arched appearance from the eleva- tion of the anchylosed nasal bones (a,) for the support of the horn, and the intermaxillaries (#,) are very slender and short, and contain each a single incisor tooth. The orbits (e,) are quite continuous with the temporal fosse, as in the tapir, but in the hippopotamus they are surrounded with a bony margin, as in the solidungula. The inferior molar teeth are here remarkably narrow, when compared with the broad cubical crowns of those of the upper jaws, and the two long conical inferior incisors (c,) project forwards, like those of a hippopotamus. The great elevation of the oc- cipital bone (d,) the great size of all the processes of the cervical vertebrae (g,) and the magnitude of the spinous processes of the dorsal vertebrae (/,) indicate the force with which the head is moved, and the powerful offensive instru- ments which it supports. In the two-horned species the anterior part of the frontal bone is raised, like the nasal bones, into an arch for the support of the posterior horn. The infra-orbitary foramen is of great size, for the nerves of the large expanded upper lip, like that of the elephant, for the nerves of the proboscis. The spinous processes continue large and strong on the lumbar, and even the sacral vertebrae, and the sacro-iliac articulation (<?,) is nearly vertical to that of the femur with the cotyloid cavity, as in many of the other ponderous skeletons of pachy- derma. The spine of the scapula (i,) arches backwards over the infra-spinati muscles, as in the elephant. The ulna and the fibula are developed and distinct throughout their whole extent, and the olecranon of the arm, like the patella of the leg, is of great size, as are the muscular processes of all the bones of the extremities. The iliac bones (q,) are expanded transversely, the tuberosities of the ischia ex- tend outwards, and the cotyloid cavities are directed down- wards. Three toes are continued to the ground before and behind, consisting each of three phalanges, the two first of these phalanges have a broad cubical form, and the last is remarkable for its rough irregular form, and its extension transversely. The terminal phalanx of the middle toe on all the feet is elongated transversely on both sides, but in the other toes it is elongated only on one side, that most remote from the middle toe ; so that ample support is afforded to the broad hoofs, and a broad base for the pon- derous carcase of this powerful quadruped. The carcase being still more ponderous in the elephants, the scapular and pelvic arches, and the whole extremities, are more vertical in their direction, and the scapular and iliac bones are of great breadth. The heavy molar teeth, and the large tusks, and the large proboscis give so much weight to the head, that the neck in these proboscidian animals is very short, and the external surface of the cranium is greatly extended for muscular and ligamentous attachments, with- out adding to the weight of the head, by the vertical cells of the diploe being filled with air admitted through the Eustachian tubes. From the strong attrition to which the molar teeth of the elephants are subjected, they are com- posed of numerous thick transverse plates of enamel en- closing the osseous portions and united together by an en- veloping crusta petrosa, and they are successively worn down to their base, and replaced by new teeth from behind, for eight or nine times during the life of the animals, while the long tusks are renewed but once. The base of the lower jaw projects more than the human. In the monotrematous animals the skull is thin, smooth, and diaphanous, and with a lengthened toothless muzzle, as in birds, as we see in the skeleton of the ornithorhyncus (Fig. 57 ,) where there are only two horny thin crowns of molar teeth (A,) at the back part, and on each side of the two jaws. Their intermaxillary bones converge at their free anterior extremities ; there is a median longitudinal osseous crest in the ornithorhynchus, extending along the interior of the occi- pital and parietal bones, and the occipital foramen (d,) is prolonged upwards, narrow in a vertical direction. The scapula (/,) especially in the ornithorhyncus, is lengthened and curved backwards, like that of a bird ; and, as also in that oviparous class, the large coracoid bones reach and unite with the sternum, the clavicles (m,) meet and are anchylosed together in front, and the sternal appendices are ossified. The ribs encompass a large proportion of the trunk, and long marsupial bones (1,) are extended forwards from the margin of the pubic bones. The long arms and legs, and the extended feet of the ornithorhyncus suit it for its aquatic life, while the stronger extremities and short feet of the echidna are suited for digging in the ground. In many of the edentata the upper and lower jaws are long, narrow, curved, and toothless, as in birds, and the trunk, as in the armadillos, is surrounded with very broad ribs. The pubic bones also are often lengthened backwards, and meet at a very narrow symphesis, and there is generally a sacro- sciatic foramen, as we find in birds, in place of the ordinary sacro-sciatic notch of quadrupeds. In the sloths there are false ribs anterior to the true ribs, as well as behind them, as we observe in most of the oviparous vertebrata, and the zygomatic arch is open in some of the ant-eaters, as the myrmecophaga jubata. From the longitudinal movement of the lower jaw in the rodentia, its condyles are extended longitudinally, and the layers of enamel are disposed trans- versely in the molar teeth. Their two chisel-shaped incisors above and below are kept sharp by means of the thin layer of very dense enamel which coats their anterior surface, and the broad crowns of their molares are kept rough by the unequal densities of the layers of enamel and of osseous substance which compose them. As the cerebral hemis- pheres are destitute of convolutions, the surfaces of the skull are thin, smooth, and often diaphanous, as in birds, and the squamous portion of the temporal bone generally remains long separate from the other elements of that bone. The mastoid bone generally forms a large bulla communi- cating with the tympanum, as in the carnivorous quadrupeds, and the orbit is here also continuous with the temporal fossa. The intermaxillary and the nasal bones are of great size, the zygomatic arch has its convexity directed down- wards, and the palatine holes are of great size, as in birds. The clavicle is sometimes complete and strong, and in many it is developed only in its central part ; the sacrum and the iliac bones are long, and the pelvis is extended backwards, as in many edentulous quadrupeds and birds. Although the radius and the ulna are free on the arms, the fibula is very imperfect, and is anchylosed to the tibia on the posterior extremities. Notwithstanding the differences observed in the skeletons of the different kinds of marsupial quadrupeds, they agree in the possession of two triangular, lengthened, marsupial bones articulated moveably to the anterior margin of the pubes, and extending forwards behind the pouch and the mammary glands, and in contact with the recti muscles of the abdomen. The skeletons of carnivorous quadrupeds have gene- rally the bones of a more compact and dense texture, combining lightness with strength in their forms, and secure, yet freely moveable in their articulations, which corresponds with their great muscular development, with the extent of their respiratory system, with the increased energy of all their functions, and with their living wants and in- stincts. From their great cerebral and intellectual develop- ment, their cranial cavity is comparatively large, and to give strength to their jaws their face is generally short and broad, as seen in these skulls of the Bengal tiger, felis tigris (Fig. 58. A. B.) The transverse occipital ridge (,) is re- markably high and prominent, for the strong muscles of the neck, as also the longitudinal ridge (b, b,) extending forwards along the occipital and parietal bones, which alone separates the the two large temporal muscles from each other. The sides of the cranium often assume a compressed form, especially where the temporal muscles are of great force as in the hyaena and in old carnivora, where many of the cranial sutures also disappear. The mastoid process (A. r,) forms a large cavity or bulla communicating with the tympanum, and enlarging the organ of hearing in these as in other nocturnal animals. The zygomatic arch (e, e,) is of great magnitude and strength, and is convex above. The temporal fossse are continuous with the orbits from the de- ficiency of the frontal, (B. #,) and the malar bone (B. A,) behind the orbits, and the zygomatic process (B. c, d,) extends laterally at a right angle from the squamous por- tion (A. c,) of the temporal, in order to form a long trans- verse glenoid cavity for the transverse articular condyle (A. #,) of the lower jaw. The parietal bones (b, b,) early anchylose in the animals of this order, so as to resist the tearing action of the temporal muscles, which have a great surface for inser- tion on the large coronoid process (A. t,) which forms the entire ramus of the lower jaw. There is a strong ossified tentorium extending inwards between the brain and cerebel- lum, to protect these delicate organs from the effects of their leaping and bounding movements. The infra-orbitary fora- men (/, /,) is large for the nerves of the upper part of the face, and the upper part of the nasal cavity is enlarged for the ethmoid and turbinated bones, by the great breadth of the nasal process (k, k,) of the superior maxillary bone and of the nasal bones, (z, i.) The intermaxillaries (o, o,) contain each three teeth, the outer of which are the largest, and the canine teeth (w, ,*) above and below are large, conical, curved, and insert- ed in very deep alveoli, (m, m.) The large transverse condyle (A. #,) of the lower jaw is little raised above the base, and is secured in a very deep glenoid cavity of the temporal bone that the jaws and teeth may meet with great precision, especially the molar teeth which have sharp cutting crowns (A. u, v, w,) directed longitudinally, and entirely covered with a very dense and thick layer of enamel. The anterior small detached molar teeth (w,) behind the canine (n y ) are the false molar es ; the larger prominent cutting molar tooth, with a tubercle at the interior of its base, is the carnivorous tooth ; (A. u,} ; and the flat broad-crowned tuberculated teeth, which are more or less developed behind these are the tuberculated molares, (A. a.*) of which there is only a very small one in the feline carnivora. The lachrymal bone is here almost confined to the orbit. By the zygomatic arch being carried forwards beneath the orbit and the condyle of the lower jaw being extended backward, the masseter muscles act with great force and advantage on the lower jaw, their place of insertion being, like that also of the temporal, considerably anterior to the point of resistance and of rotation. The transverse processes of the atlas and the spinous process of the axis are of great length, and the processes generally of the cervical vertebrae for the strong muscles of the neck, by which they have to tear their food to pieces, or to carry their victims to a place of retreat. There is great strength with flexibility in all parts of the vertebral column, and hence their slender ribs encom- pass a smaller portion of the trunk than in the ponderous bodies of the pachyderma, but their thoracic cavity is wide and capaceous. The lumbar region is extensive, and the trans- verse processes of the vertebrae are there directed forwards. The sacro-iliac articulation is very oblique, giving greater elasticity to the attachment of the legs to the trunk, and the coccygeal vertebras are generally very numerous and moveable. The scapula is broad and strong, the clavicles imperfect or wanting, and the muscular processes of the bones of the arm and fore-arm are strongly marked. Above the inner condyle of the humerus (fig. 59, C. ,) is a large oblique foramen, through which the ulnar artery passes forwards, protected from external pressure, as we see also in some of the climbing quadrumana. In the soft and flexible hand of the carnivora, as in that of the tiger (fig. 59, A.), the carpal bones are generally reduced to seven by the anchylosis of the scaphoid and lunar bones (a), and the succeeding bones of the metacarpus (c) and the phalanges of the fingers (d, e,) present strong and secure articulations, the last phalanx on the hands (e, e,) as on the feet (B. e, e,) being directed upwards to d preserve the sharp claws from abrasion. The inner toe of the anterior and posterior extremities (A. d, B. ,) so imperfectly developed in most of the digitigrade carnivora is generally longer in the plantigrade and the aquatic species. In the true insectivorous quadrupeds without wings, as the hedge-hogs shrews and moles, the jaws are more lengthened, the canine teeth are often small, the molar teeth have broad crowns with an outer and inner row. of sharp-pointed tuber- cles to seize and bruise the insect food, the scapular arch is strengthened by clavicles, the radius and ulna are separate and moveable on each other, the rudimentary fibula is anchy- losed to the tibia, all the feet are plantigrade and pentadacty- lous and the toes and claws are strong for scraping and digging. The orbit is continuous with the temporal fossa, the zygoma- tic arch is very slender and straight, the infra-orbitary foramen large, and the articulation of the lower jaw flat. There is great mobility in the articulations of the hedge-hogs, as in other spiny and scaly quadrupeds, to allow of their coiling their body into the form of a ball for protection. The ante- rior portion of the skeleton is more developed than the pos- terior in the moles, to enable them more easily to burrow, and in the cheiroptera to favour their flight through the air. The cranial bones, the occipital, the parietal, and the frontal, are remarkably extended forwards in the mole, compared with the extent of the anterior bones of the face. The coronoid process of the lower jaw rises high through the zygomatic arch, and the angle of the jaw is prolonged backwards and a little inwards over the mastoid portion of the temporal bone. The fore part of the septum of the nose is ossified in this animal as in the hogs, to support the nose in digging. The spinous process of the axis is large and extended back- wards, but the succeeding cervical vertebrae are like narrow distant rings, almost destitute of spinous and transverse pro- cesses, to allow the freest motion in this part with safety to the enclosed spinal chord. The sternum is extended for- wards to a great distance before the first pair of ribs, and is carinated like that of a bird, to afford an extensive surface of attachment to the large pectoral muscles ; and for the same reason,, as well as to lodge large respiratory organs, the ribs encompass a widely expanded thoracic cavity. The clavicles are very short and strong, the scapulae long and narrow, the humerus short and widely expanded at both ends, the ole- cranon of great magnitude and extent, the bones of the hand short, fixed, and strong for rapidly excavating the ground, and one of the carpal bones is lengthened and curved forwards to increase the inner surface of this digging instrument. The pelvis and the posterior extremities are very small, the pelvic bones are anchylosed to the sacrum, the pubics are separate in front, and the fibula is reduced to a small process of the tibia as in most other digging and burrowing qua- drupeds. The skeletons of the cheiroptera are constructed for flight and present, as in the moles, the anterior portion much more developed than the posterior. The jaws are lengthened for the reception of numerous broad-crowned sharp- tuberculated insectivorous molar teeth. The canine teeth are generally long and pointed, the intermaxillary bones small and imper- fectly ossified, the palatine bones separate, the zygomatic arch is very feeble, and the orbits, for their very small eyes, are continuous with the temporal fossse, as in carnivora. The bones of bats are generally light and compact in their texture and some of their ordinary sutures, as the sagittal, early disappear in the cranium. The orbit is surrounded with a complete osseous margin in the pier opus. In the rhinolophus the intermaxillaries are small, soft, and cartilagi- nous, and contain each but one incisor tooth; and in the nycteris these bones are united by a moveable articulation to the upper jaw-bones, like the moveable upper bill of parrots and cockatoos. The cervical and lumbar regions of the skeleton admit of free motion, and the long iliac bones are often anchylosed to the sacrum as in the feathered tribes. The coccygeal vertebrae are often prolonged to support an in- ter femoral membrane, as in the pteropus and rhinolophus. The long pubic bones scarcely meet at the symphesis, and the cotyloid cavities are directed obliquely backwards which assists in the retroversion of the feet. The scapulae have a broad expanded form, the clavicles are long and strong, the coracoid process is lengthened and curved downwards and inwards, and the fore part of the sternum is often deeply carinated like that of a bird. The long cylindrical humerus is succeeded solely by the radius in the fore-arm, the ulna being reduced to its olecranon, which often forms a separate moveable patella at the elbow, like that of the knee-joint. The carpal bones occupy a very small space in the hand, and the long fingers are here fixed in a state of extension, as they are in the hand of the bird, the thumb alone admitting of free flexion and extension. The hand of the bats rotates on the carpal end of the radius by a motion of abduction and adduc- tion, as the wing of the bird, so that, when folded, the little finger lies along the outside of the radius. The thumb is not enclosed in the interdigital membrane, but is extended for- wards free as a prehensile organ for progressive motion, or for suspending its body. The long slender meta-carpal bones and phalanges of the four succeeding fingers support the interdigital membrane, and there are often claws on the fore and on the middle finger. The small legs are twisted outwards from their commencement in the oblique cotyloid cavities of the open pelvis. The femur is of a cylindrical form, slender, and with a large articular head, and a large trochanter minor directed forwards, the trochanter major being here turned backwards. The fibula is broad at its tarsal extremity, but is almost lost before it reaches the upper end of the long slender tibia. From the retroverted direction of the cotyloid cavities and of the whole legs the tibia is" placed externally, and the fibula internally. The short bent calcaneum directed inwards has often extending from its tuberosity, along the margin of the interfemoral membrane, a slender elastic bone, which supports that membrane. The slender parallel toes directed backwards terminate in long, curved, sharp prehensile claws, by which they most frequently suspend their body in an inverted posi- tion, the best suited for their launching instantaneously into the air with outspread wings, when called by hunger or alarm. In the lowest of the quadrumanous animals, as the lemurs of Madagascar, the jaws are still lengthened for numerous insectivorous molar teeth, and the skeleton generally is adapted for the horizontal position of the trunk. The oc- cipital foramen is placed near the posterior margin of the skull, the mastoid cells are as large as in carnivorous quad- rupeds, and although the orbit is here surrounded with an osseous margin, it is still continuous behind with the tem- poral fossa. The cranial cavity, however, is here capacious, and the ordinary sutures of the human cranium continue permanent, as in the higher forms of quadrumana. The sagittal suture often traverses the frontal bone, and the an- terior frontals are sometimes seen separate. The temporal fossa is small, the zygomatic arch feeble, the condyles of the lower jaw and their glenoid cavities flat, the lachrymal bones extend downwards from the orbits, and are perforated on their facial surface, and the nasal bones, unlike those of higher quadrumana, are broad, long, straight longitudinally, and form an expanded arch in their transverse direction, as in carnivora and other inferior tribes. The ramus of the lower jaw is still very short, its condyles are nearly as low as the alveoli of the teeth, and the coronoid processes rise high through the zygomatic arches. The inferior incisor teeth, four in number, as in the simise and in man, project straight from the lower jaw, as those of a kangaroo, and this direction is seen also in the stenops, the galago, and the lichanotus. The face and entire head become shorter as we ascend through these genera to the true simiae of the old and new continents. In the simiee the lamdoidal, the sagit- tal, the squamous, and the coronal sutures advance forwards on the cranium more and more as the cerebral centres and the cranial cavity enlarge, and the face becomes proportion- ally small. As the muzzle shortens, the facial angle en- creases by the elevation and expansion of the frontal bone, and by this shortening of the jaws less space is afforded for numerous molar teeth. The orbits approximate, assume an anterior and parallel direction, separated only by a narrow ethmoid, and their communication with the temporal fossae is cut off by an osseous partition formed by the extension of the frontal and malar bones. The temporal fossa be- comes reduced in size, the zygomatic arch short and straight, the condyloid articulation of the lower jaw flat and free, the lachrymal bone confined to the orbit, and the nasal bones flat, narrow, short, and often anchylosed together. The intermaxillaries continue permanently separate up to the orangs, and the incisors, four above and below, as in man, continue more inclined forwards than in the human jaws. The canine teeth, as instruments of prehension and of de- fence, continue large and projecting, and the sharp tuber- cles of the molar teeth of the insectivorous and nocturnal makis, become more short and rounded in the higher quad- rumana, correspond with the softer quality of their succu- lent and juicy food. The ramus of the lower jaw ascends higher and more abruptly, and the coronoid process is re- duced in length and strength. The occipital foramen ad- vances forwards on the base of the skull by the expansion of the posterior region, and the occipital bone becomes con- fined to the basilar aspect of the cranium. The supra-or- bitary foramen is generally absent, or a mere notch, and the infra-orbitary hole is commonly divided into several small apertures. In the orangs the intermaxillaries anchy- lose to the upper jaw-bones, and to each other in the adult, as in the human jaws. The general forms of the bones and articu- lations of the rest of the skeleton are adapted for the semi-erect or climb- ing position of the trunk, as seen in the skeleton of the mona monkey, cercopithecus mona, (Fig. 60.) The cervical, and lumbar, and coccygeal regions of the column generally admit of free and extensive motion. The cervical vertebrae have their spinous pro- cesses simple and point- ed, the dorsal vertebrae nearly of the same num- ber as in man, and the lumbar vertebrae encreas- ed in number at the ex- pense of the sacrum. The transverse processes more directed for- wards towards the head than the human in these free and moveable lumbar vertebra;. In the prehensile tails of most of the American quadrumana the coccygeal verte- brae are en creased in number and mobility, and in the strength of their articulations ; they are generally more lengthened and cylindrical in the long- tailed quadrumana of the old continent. The scapulae are still lengthened and narrow, but with an elevated spine, the clavicles are strong, and curved like the human, the coracoid and acromion processes are of considerable size, and the glenoid cavity comparatively deep. The humerus is more curved than the human, and the radius and ulna are more lengthened and slender, and admit of very free pronation and supination. There are often nine bones in the carpus by the division of one in the second row, to give greater mobility and prehen- sile power to the whole hand, and for the same object all the bones of the meta-carpus, and the phalanges of the fingers, which have the same number of bones as in the human hand, are much lengthened. The thumb is shorter and less opposeable to the other fingers than in man. The pos- terior members have the same long, slender, and prehensile character as the anterior. The sacrum generally consists of three anchylosed vertebree, the iliac bones are long and narrow, and directed longitudinally, and the tuberosity of the ischium expands, outwards, covered with the callosities on which these animals generally rest. The femur is much curved, its neck short, and the trochanter major much ele- vated. The long, slender, and separate tibia and fibula admit of free motion in the foot, as a prehensile organ, and which is in- creased by the shortness of the tuberosity of the calcaneum.The astragalus is twisted obliquely outwards, and this inclination, increased by the form of the calcaneum, is communicated through the scaphoid and cuboid, and the three cuneiform bones to the meta-tarsus and the whole foot, which is thus made to rest obliquely on its outer margin, and the inner toes are raised from the ground, and left free for prehension. The inner toe of the foot is here attached in a very oblique manner to the internal cuneiform bone, which is placed much below the others, and it is thus opposed slightly to the other more lengthened toes of the foot, and that organ is converted into a prehensile hand. In the highest of the quadrumana, the chimpanze of Africa, the nasal bones are more raised from the face, the incisors more vertical, and the facial angle greater than in the inferior forms, the scapulae and the iliac bones are more expanded, the calcaneum extends more backwards, and the forms and proportions of all the bones of the skeleton approach most closely to the human. The forms of the bones and of the articulations of the human skeleton are adapted to support the trunk in a vertical position upon the feet, by which the organs of the senses are directed forwards, and the arms are left free, for various employments. By the great develop- ment of his cerebral organs, and the su- perior elements of his cranial vertebrae (Fig. 61,) the skull is large, and its cavity capa- cious. The organs of the senses being con- fined to a narrow space the face is small, and it is nearly straight from the frontal hour to the chin, from the slight projection of the muzzle, excepting in the negro, where the projection of the jaws and teeth, and the receding of the frontal bone, reduce the facial angle more near to that of the orangs. The occipital foramen, and the two occipital condyles are advanced further for- wards on the base of the skull than in any of the quadrumana ; so that the head is more nearly poised by the centre of its base on the atlas, and on the vertical column of the trunk. The forehead, and nasal bones, and the chin project more than in the nearest quadrumana, the incisors are more nearly perpendicular, the canini shorter, and the tubercles of the molares more rounded, correspond- ing with the softer condition of his food. The squamous portion of the temporal bone, the great ala of the sphenoid, and the superior portion of the occipital, are here more largely expanded ; the temporal fossa, the zygoma, and the coronoid process of the lower jaw are small. The ramus of the lower jaw is larger, and forms a more acute angle with the base, the condyle is more elevated and convex, and the glenoid cavity for its reception is deeper than in the quadru- mana. The nasal process of the superior maxillary and the lachrymal bone pass more into the orbit, and the orbits are more parallel in their direction, which gives greater preci- sion to all visual impressions. The vertebral column in the direction of the median plane has a greater sigmoid curva- ture ; the cervical vertebrae have their spinous processes more broad, short, and bifurcated ; the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae extend more at a right angle from the bodies -, the sacrum is longer, broader, and more arched, and the coccyx is comparatively small. The ribs are more convex, the sternum shorter and broader, the clavicles are more curved and strong, and the scapula is shorter and more expanded at its vertebral margin. The glenoid cavity of the scapula is more lateral in its direction, the humerus, with a large articular rounded head, is more straight ; the olecranon of the ulna is comparatively short, and the bones of the thumb are more lengthened and more opposeable to the other fingers. The pelvis is shorter and broader than in the inclined bodies of the quadrumana ; the iliac bones are more expanded and convex, more extended over the acetabulum, and with a longer crest ; the tuberosity of the ischium is less prominent, and the symphesis pubis is shorter. From the greater breadth of the pelvis, the femora are more distant from each other, their head has a less extensive articular surface, and is marked by the ligamentum teres which is absent in the orangs ; the cervix femoris is longer, and directed more obliquely downwards, and the trochanter major is less elevated. The bones of the legs, stronger and more distant from each other, afford a brOad and secure base of support for the erect and weighty trunk, and the strength of this base is encreased by the plantigrade position of the whole foot, the parallelism and magnitude of the inner toe, the advanced position of the astragalus, the extension back- wards of the tuberosity of the calcaneum, the fixed condi- tion of the tarsus, and the strength of the meta-tarsal bones, and the phalanges of the toes. CHAPTER SECOND. ORGANS OP ATTACHMENT, OR LIGAMENTS. THE solid parts of the skeleton, whether external or in- ternal, are held in connexion and are allowed to move on each other with more or less freedom, by means of soft parts, which are almost as inert in their vital properties as the bones themselves, and this low degree of vitality better enables them to sustain the stretching and compression to which they are continually subjected. Even in the highest animals the ligaments which connect the bones, and the cartilages which bound their contiguous sufaces, are scantily supplied with blood-vessels and nerves, and have a corresponding low degree of sensibility, great slowness of growth and reproduction, and great tenacity of life. In the lowest tribes the component pieces of the skeleton are held together by the simplest mode of union, they have not their points of contact protected by a layer of soft cartilage, lubricated with synovia, and connected by capsular ligaments and external ligamentous bands, they are partially or entirely imbedded in a common tough connecting matter, which, by its elasticity, admits of the few required motions. No articulations nor ligaments appear in the soft, gelatinous, transparent bodies of the animalcules, but in the poriphe- rous animals the dense silicious and calcareous spicula which compose their solid frame-work are supported and maintained in their positions by a more tough, elastic and firm portion of the general cellular tissue of the body, perhaps stimu- lated to condensation by the presence of these earthy crys- talline bodies. By the motions of the body, produced by external bodies, the points of these sharp spicula are made to project from this tough connecting matter in various directions from the gelatinous surface of the body, from the margins of the pores, or into the internal canals. The tubu- lar filaments in the horny species anastomose with each other freely throughout the whole body, like the continuous connecting matter in the earthy species. The jointed ap- pearance seen in most flexible tubular keratophytes, as ser- tularia, plumnlaria, campanularia, is confined to the exterior covering, and does not interrupt the course of the fluids circulating through the enclosed fleshy part. These thinner portions and annular strictures of the horny covering allow of the more ready development of new branches, cells, or vesicles, and of the incessant movements of all their parts produced by the ever-restless sea. The branches of the cellaria thuya drop off regularly from below upwards along the stem, at these apparent joints. The minute calcareous spicula of many corticiferous and fleshy zoophytes, as gor- gonia and lobularia, are connected by the general cellular substance of the body. The black, flexible, elastic matter deposited in concentric layers between the calcareous inter- nal solid pieces of the isis hippuris, are merely uncalcified portions of the common animal matter which pervades the whole skeleton, and connects all its earthy particles ; they are like the uncalcified portions of corallines, but are secreted, as the calcareous matter of the skeleton, by the enveloping fleshy crust. The exterior sharp spines of pennatulte are connected and moved by the coriaceous irritable skin of the body. The skeletons of zoophytes, as those of higher tes- taceous animals, are insinuated into the minutest inequalities of the surface of rocks, and thus adhere firmly, by being exuded in a soft semi-fluid state, and then condensing. The cartilaginous, internal, reticulate filaments of many alcyonia are continuous, like those of horny poriphera, throughout the whole body. Broken fragments of the solid skeletons of zoophytes are readily re-united by the exudations from the fleshy substance, of similar ossific matter around the broken extremities, as we see in the testaceous extravascular coverings of higher classes. The delicate vertical, crescentic lamina of the velella is continuous with the more thick horizontal plate on which it rests, and is not detached by maceration. The moveable, lateral, solid plates of the stel- lerida are connected both by irritable and ligamentous bands, as are also the solid jointed moveable spines frequently developed on their upper surface. The plates composing the shells of the echinida are united by harmonic sutures, and the spines are united to the tubercles by the enarthroid form of articulation, where there are marginal muscles, an exterior capsule, and generally a round central ligament, like the ligamentum teres of the femur, as in the cidaris and spatangus. The unconsolidated portions of the general cuticular exudation form the means of connection between the dense external parts of the trunk and its appendices in the helminthoid and in the entomoid classes of diplo-neura. This we already find in the segments of the trunk and of the rudimentary antennse of some of the higher epizoa, in the tough epidermic membrane connecting the pieces of pedunculated cirrhopodous shells, and in the segments and cirrhi of the same animals, and of many of the higher an- nelides. In the more solid skeletons of the entomoid classes, the calcified coverings of the segments of the trunk and of the antennse and palpi are partially retracted within each other, and are connected by numerous muscles, and by the true skin, and its continuous thin epidermis. The other appendices developed from the sides of the body present chiefly the ginglimoid forms of articulation without the aid of ligaments, where one portion of the skeleton is locked into another, and where the motions of the joints are very secure, but limited in extent ; these forms of the articula- tions w r e see especially in the strong members of the larger Crustacea and coleopterous insects. The valves of con- chifera are connected together both by the teeth of the hinge, which are often locked into each other, as in spondy- lus, and by the tough extra-vascular ligament, which gro\vs by successive layers of epidermic matter, and constantly tends by its elasticity to separate the two valves between which it is placed. The eight transverse plates composing the shell of the chitons have generally a strong coriaceous ligamentous band connecting their margins, and secreted like the ligaments of conchifera, by the surface of the skin. The byssus of conchifera consists of horny filaments se- creted in a fluid state by a gland behind the base of the foot; they are conveyed along a median groove of the foot, to be attached to external solid bodies, to anchor the more delicate shells, as pinna and other mytilacious bivalves. The horny operculum of most of the testaceous turbinated gasteropods is of a condensed albuminous nature, secreted in successive superimposed layers added to the attached surface by the muscular foot, to which it adheres in the same manner as the retractor muscle adheres to the columella of the shell. From the ginglimoid hinge of the shells of conchiferous mollusca admitting only of flexion and extension in one direction, few, though powerful, muscles are required to effect their motions ; but the joints of the articulated classes of animals being generally formed by a segment of one sphere being enclosed within another, and consequently ad- mitting of rotation in every direction, numerous muscles are required to effect their varied movements. The ginglimoid crural joints of the entomoid classes being formed by hollow, cutaneous, solid tubes, have generally one very strong and broad flexor tendon, and a more narrow and feeble extensor tendon, into which all the muscles of the joint are inserted, and they are deeply excavated and covered only by the unconsolidated, thin, tough epidermis and skin on the side to which the joints are inflected. There are no opercula, or moveable pieces of the shells in the pteropoda or cephalo- poda, and the soft cartilaginous, organized, internal bones of the cephalopods are connected only by muscles, and by thin unconsolidated portions of their own soft matter. In the soft, flexible, cartilaginous skeletons of the lowest cyclostome fishes, there are scarcely any traces of articula- tions or ligaments, and in the higher chondropterygii they are almost confined to the most moveable parts connected with mastication, and the fins for progressive motion. In fishes, as in the inferior classes, where the skeleton becomes more consolidated by earthy depositions, the articulations and ligaments become more developed and distinct. The vertebral ligaments of osseous fishes are white, fibrous, and dense in their texture, and by their elasticity they bring back forcibly the vertebral column to the straight position when it has been drawn to either side by the lateral strata of muscles. The moveable intermaxillary, palatine, and superior jaw bones are connected by a tough fibro-cartilagi- nous membrane, as well as by muscular attachments. The moveable articulations of fishes are mostly effected by a tough interposed cartilage, which envelopes the contiguous ends of the bones. This substance is much softer than the corresponding fibro-cartilaginous parts of higher classes, and is more readily dissolved by boiling water. In place of the interposed elastic sacs between the cup-like cavities of the vertebrae of fishes, or the firm connecting layer of fibro- cartilage between the vertebrae of mammalia, we find the bodies of the vertebrae of reptiles united by distinct move- able articulations, or enarthroses, with strong capsular liga- ments and synovial secretion, and many of the vertebrae of birds, especially of the neck, are united by the same free and secure articulations. In the amphibia and in the rep- tiles, most of the articulations are constructed on a simpler plan than in the warm-blooded classes ; there is yet no in- ter-articular cartilage between the condyle of the lower jaw and the temporal bone, nor a ligarnentum teres between the femur and the cotyloid cavity ; but the articular surfaces of the long bones are covered with smooth and firm carti- lage, are lubricated with synovia, and are enclosed in strong capsular ligaments. The articular processes of the vertebrae have here their synovial capsules, and the spinous processes their inter-spinal ligaments. The articular cavities of the joints are less deepened by cartilaginous margins, the inter- nal loose cartilages of the joints are more rare, the exterior ligamentous bands are more simple in their arrangements, and there are fewer immoveable synarthroses than in birds and mammalia. The capsular ligaments are thinner, and of a more dense texture in birds than even in mammalia, and more synovia is poured into the joints, especially of the neck and extremities, on account of the extent and rapidity of their movements and the high temperature of their body. Each end of the tympanic bone is here enveloped in its synovial capsule, although most of the cranial bones have lost even their connecting sutures, and most of the vertebrae have their bodies united by free and secure synarthroses. Less pressure being exerted on the joints in the light bodies of birds than in the heavy bodies of mammalia, there is a much thinner layer of elastic cartilage on the contiguous ends of their bones than in quadrupeds, and from the light- ness of their head, as in other oviparous vertebrata, com- pared with that of most quadrupeds, they have no necessity for a ligamentum nuchae to support it. The thick, firm, elastic layer of fibro-cartilage interposed between the flat bodies of the vertebrae of quadrupeds is the mode of arti- culation which best corresponds with the strength and the slow and limited motions required in that region of their skeleton. The synovial capsules of the articular processes of the vertebrae are more developed in the active trunks of carnivorous and of climbing mammalia than in the more weighty and motionless bodies of pachyderma and rumi- nantia. The long anterior and posterior vertebral ligaments are of great strength and elasticity along the pliant columns of cetacea without and within the spinal canal, and in the long and pliant tails of many quadrupeds we find the highly moveable bodies of the coccygeal vertebrae united by syno- vial capsules, to facilitate their motions. The heavy-headed herbivorous quadrupeds have the ligamentum nuchee of great size and strength, extending from the occipital protuberance along the spinous processes of the dorsal, and often of all the succeeding vertebrae to the coccygeal, sending a pair of laminae downwards to be attached to each spinous process. In the light-headed and muscular car- nivorous species this ligament is very small, and generally extends forwards only to the large spinous process of the axis, and in many of the most active rodent and quadruma- nous mammalia, no trace of this cervical ligament is per- ceptible. In the strong extremities of heavy herbivorous quadrupeds, where limited motions and secure articulations are required, the capsular ligaments are less loose and elastic than in the carnivora, where greater freedom and extent of motion are necessary, and greater force of action. Strong transverse ligaments pass in the elastic feet of rumi- nating quadrupeds from the one penultimate phalanx to the other, to prevent the tearing of the two toes asunder during their rapid and bounding movements, which are not com- patible with the extensive movements of the toes of carni- vorous species. In the slow-moving extremities of the ele- phant, the rhinoceros, and the hippopotamus, there is no ligamentum teres to fix the head of the femur to the cotyloid cavity, nor do we find it in the kangaroo^ the sloths, or the monotrema, nor in the sedate orangs, which so much ap- proach the human species. CHAPTER THIRD. ON THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM, OR ACTIVE ORGANS OF MOTION. FIRST SECTION. General Observations on the Muscular System. THE movements of animals are effected by the muscular system, the most remarkable and essential property of which is the power of contracting with rapidity and force on the application of stimuli. The fibrous structure is not a constant character, nor essential to the irritability of this system, although that vital property is greatest in all the higher classes, where this structure prevails. These irri- table fibres appear to consist of lineal aggregates of fibri- iious globules, the union of which is most intimate where the contractile power is greatest. The cohesion of these globules is least where all lineal arrangement is lost, in the lowest tribes of animals, in which the slowly irritable fleshy substance appears as a soft, homogeneous, cellular tissue. The muscular system effects all the locomotions of animals, and all the movements of their organs of relation, and forms a constituent part of all the active organs of vegetative life 5 so that the consideration of many parts of this system is inseparable from the history of particular organs. The contractity of the muscular fibre is intimately connected with the extent of respiration in animals, being feeble in the radiated and molluscous tribes, where the respiration is small, and more energetic in the articulated classes, where the respiration is greater, and generally aerial, and for the same reason it is less powerful in the imperfectly aerated reptiles than in the feathered tribes where the air permeates every region of the body. It is by means of this system that animals are enabled to move to and fro, to seize and masticate their food, or to convey it through their alimen- tary cavity, to circulate their fluids through the body, to force all discharges from their system, to bring the surround- ing element into contact with their blood, to produce various sounds for mutual intercourse, and to vary to infinity the outward form and expression of their body ; the different parts of this great and complicated system can therefore be classified and arranged according to the functions to which they are most subservient. The movements of voluntary muscles appear to be accompanied with a distinct perception of their active state, and to become associated with feelings of the mind ; so that they chiefly belong to the organs of relation, or the functions of animal life, while those of the involuntary muscles, unaccompanied by sensations, and more independent of the rest of the body, are chiefly connected with the organs and functions of vegetative life. In most muscles the component fibres run parallel to each other, with numerous minute nervous fibrils and capillary blood-vessels running in the same longitudinal direction between them, and freely anastomosing to produce a complicated net-work throughout the whole texture. Although the muscular fibres are organs distinct in their whole course, they are united into fasciculi, and these into entire muscles by means of cellu- lar tissue, and they are generally inserted into strong, tough, fibrous tendons, which are less supplied with nerves and blood-vessels than the muscles themselves, and are destitute of irritability. The muscles of the highest classes of red- blooded animals, during their development, pass through the soft, colourless, homogeneous, and gelatinous condition of those of the lowest animals, before they assume the red colour, the dense fibrous structure, and the highly irritable and contractile property, which they possess in their mature form. - SECOND SECTION. Organs of Motion in the Cyclo-Neurose, or Radiated Classes. Although the aid of the microscope has not enabled us to detect muscular fibres in the transparent and active bodies of the polygastric animalcules, most of them exhibit distinct signs of lively irritability in contracting bending and stretch- ing their whole body, or its anterior prehensile part ; and they are carried rapidly to and fro in their dense element by the rapid vibration of minute cilia generally disposed in regular series on their external surface. The cilia are the organs of respiration, as well as of locomotion in these animalcules, and they are generally longest and largest on the anterior part of the body, especially around the mouth, and in the flat forms, as the cyclidium, the long cilia form a vibratile zone around the inferior margin of the body. Where the ante- rior part of the body is obliquely truncated, as in many of the kolpoda, the vibration of the cilia gives a revolving mo- tion to the whole body in its progression. In most of the trichodae and paramtecia the cilia are disposed in regular close longitudinal series extending over the whole outer surface of the body, and of the greatest length around the oblique mouth. The vorticella have two rows of cilia dis- posed around their anterior circular extremity. The cilia have been observed in almost every class of animals from the polygastrica to the mammalia, and both on the surface and in the interior of the body ; but the means by which they are moved have not been detected. No cilia have been seen in the spermatic animalcules, which are extremely minute and are moved by the lateral motions of their slender tail, like tadpoles, which implies greater irritability and muscular development than in the ordinary polygastrica. The action of vibratile cilia is always so much independent of the will, or connection with the rest of the body, that it continues for some time after the part to which they are attached has been severed from the animal ; and this is observed even in those of adult birds and quadrupeds. Jaws containing sixteen teeth have been detected in the loxodes cuculluluSy which necessitate great muscular development in this minute polygastric animalcule. The soft cellular tissue which pervades the whole fibrous texture of poripherous animals, and lines their pores, canals, and vents, does not exhibit distinct signs of irritability or contractility when acted on by the strongest stimulants, and the currents continue to be impelled rapidly through these passages even in thin portions cut from the body. It is probable, therefore, that the currents are produced solely by means of cilia which are numerous and large over the sur- face of these animals, when in the state of gemmules newly detached from the parent. The ciliated free gemmules of poriphera do not exhibit signs of irritability by contracting their body, and changing their form like those of zoophytes. The cellular substance of the poripherous animals, being still of a soft and semi-fluid consistence, is incapable of effecting any perceptible movements in the fibrous skeleton which it permeates. The general fleshy mass of the body possesses distinct though languid irritability in almost all forms of zoophytes, although the fibrous structure is seldom developed in any part. This property is manifested in the lobidaria by the spontaneous slow contraction and dilation of its body at different periods of the day by the influence of temperature and light, or by the slow contraction of a part of the body which has been touched or irritated. This fleshy contractile part is the same which secretes the solid matter of the skeleton in this class, and developes the po- lypi from different parts of its surface. The relation of this irritable and secreting part to the internal axis in the corti- ciferous zoophytes is seen in the section of the isis hippuris, (Fig. 62. B.) where the calcareous solid portions (#,) and the flexible, elastic, ligamentous parts (b,) occupy the centre of the fleshy substance (c,) and the cells of the polypi (d, d 9 ) are seen to be here confined entirely to this irritable crust, and to leave no impression on the axis. The polypi are the most irritable and contractile parts of the body in all zoo- phytes, and the most exquisitely sensitive to external im- pressions. The polypi are prehensile sacs or mouths deve- loped from and continuous with the fleshy substance of zoophytes, their margin is surrounded with delicate fleshy arms or tentacula, which vary in different species from six to more than thirty. The polypi are seen extended from the fleshy substance of the isis in Fig. 62. A., d, d, the fleshy part covers the branch at (c,) and is removed from the jointed skeleton at (0, a, b, b.) The fleshy part of the isis appears to be incapable of bending the joints of the skeleton, and it has as little effect on the skeleton in the other corticiferous zoophytes. Where it forms thin laminae consolidated with calcareous matter, and disposed around the parietes of cells, as flustrce, eschara, and cellarice, it is as little capable of moving the axis. In the cellaria loriculata (Fig. 62. C,) where the cells of the polypi (a, a,) are disposed in regular consecutive pairs with their apertures opposite, and with contracted articulations (c, c,) at the bases of the cells, neither the enclosed polypi, nor the fleshy part of the entire animal are capable of bending the articulations. The slow contraction of the pennatula phos- phorca coils up the thin flexible extremities of its calcareous axis, and moves the retroverted spines of its exterior surface so as to push the animal slowly along a rough surface. In the vaginiform zoophytes the internal currents of the body are not produced by the contractions of the internal fleshy parietes, though compared by Cavolini to a heart, but by the action of vibratile cilia, and the open base of the polypi often con- tracts, as if by a movement of deglutition. The polypi being the organs by which the food is attracted, seized, and digested, and the surface of the body aerated, they possess the most complicated structure and the highest vitality. The tentacula surrounding the mouth, as in the flustra carbesia (Fig. 63. d } ) have generally minute vibratile cilia disposed along their sides, by the action of which currents of water conveying animalcules and other food, are directed towards these prehensile and digestive cavities. In these compli- cated and highly irritable polypi of the flustra, we perceive numerous muscular bands (Fig. 63. c,) connecting the lower part of the polypus with the aperture of the cell, and others passing from the same part of the polypus downwards, to connect it with the bottom of the cell (e.) The vibratile cilia move the currents outwards along one side of each tentaculum (d,) and inwards along the other side, and they are generally vi- sible only while they move in the di- rection of the currents which they produce, that is in their forward stroke. When in full activity the cilia are in- visible in their backward movement, from the velocity with which they resume their position, to commence a new stroke forward. And as vibratile cilia are thus generally perceptible only in their slow forward impelling move- ment, they have some resemblance to a stream of globules flowing always in one direction. There are about fifty cilia on each side of a tentaculum in the flustra carbesia, and nearly forty millions on a moderate specimen of the entire animal. In many zoophytes they are much more numerous ; so that these fixed and plant-like animals, though possessing a very low degeee of irritability in their general mass, are well provided with active organs to bring their food towards them, and to renew the stratum of water in contact with their surface, for the purpose of respiration. The vibratile cilia are generally disposed around the mouth of the polypus where the cilia of the tentacula themselves are not vibratile, but merely lateral extensions of these prehensile organs. The naked hydrae are irritable and contractile in every part of the body, and their texture ap- pears cellular throughout, without any distinct muscular fibres. The fibrous structure is partially developed in the irritable parts of some of the larger and more complicated polypi, as those of the pennatula, virgularia, and lobularia y and they form distinct longitudinal and sphincter bands in the actinia and in the polypi of some of the larger litho- phytes, as fungiae, explanaria, and car yophy Ilia, which so much resemble fixed actiniae. Many of the acalepha swim, like animalcules, by the movement of external, longitudinally-disposed, vibratile cilia. These cilia are large, and generally visible by the naked eye, and are distinctly supported by parallel rays, like the fins of a fish ; but the muscular apparatus by which they are so rapidly vibrated is not perceptible. From the development of the nervous system, and even of eyes con- taining a crystalline lens, seen in some of the animals of this class, it is probable that the parallel fibrous striae per- ceptible in the highly contractile mantle of medusae are of a muscular nature. The long tentacular filaments which we so frequently find developed from the periphery of the man- tle possess a high degree of irritability, and are exquisitely sensitive. The muscular development is less required in the hydrostatic or physograde species, which are supported at the surface of the sea by an air-bag, or a sac filled with a gaseous secretion due to its own parietes. The large pecti- nated cilia of the ciliograde acalepha have the same kind of rapid vibratile motion as the minuter forms of these organs seen in zoophytes and animalcules, and they continue in the same manner their movements independent of the rest of the animal in parts severed from the body. The fixed crinoid echinoderma appear to move their numerous calcareous articulations by the exterior irritable and secreting fleshy covering which envelopes all parts of their body. In the free stellerida the nervous and the mus- cular systems "are already obviously developed, and eyes are observed on the asterias. The segments of many of the stellerida are connected together and moved by muscular bands, which are distinctly fibrous, and both longitudinal and circular fibres are seen on the highly irritable and con- tractile feet, which extend from the ambulacra. The same muscular structure is seen in the long tubular prehensile feet of the echinida, where the segments of the trunk are im- moveably united by harmonic sutures. Strong adductor and abductor muscles are seen attached to the moveable pieces of the jaws in many of these species, and strong muscular fasciculi pass from around the base of the external spines to the periphery of the tubercles on which they move. In the naked holothurige, the tough, exterior, coriaceous covering is . highly irritable and contractile ; these animals are provided with five crowded longitudinal rows of the usual tubular, muscular, prehensile feet extended like those of other echinoderma by the injection of water into their median cylindrical cavity ; their dental apparatus is provided with its muscular bands, and the five larger of these osseous plates around the mouth give attachment to five strong lon- gitudinal muscular bands which extend beneath the skin to the posterior extremity of the body. Muscular System of the Diplo-Neurose, or Articulated Classes. The development and energy of the muscular system are greater in the articulated than in the radiated, or even the molluscous classes, which corresponds with the greater ex- tent of their respiration, and with the higher condition of all their other organs of relation. In the subcutaneous mus- cular tunic of the nematoid entozoa, we already perceive the longitudinal and transverse short interrupted filements, which are more symmetrically arranged into bands and muscles, where the segments of the trunk are more consolidated and distinct in higher classes. In the outer layer of this mus- cular coat, the short interrupted and interlacing fibres have a transverse direction, and those of the same kind forming the inner layer have a longitudinal direction, and are generally grouped to form four lengthened contractile bands ; the longitudinal fibres compose distinct muscles, especially at the anterior part of the body where they are attached to the moveable parts of the mouth. The muscular fibres are not perceptible and the irritability is most feeble in the cystoid and cestoid forms of this class. The long pliant organs of attachment by which the entomoid forms of these entozoa adhere to the surface of aquatic animals, present generally distinct longitudinal muscular bands, as we see in lern&a, and they are also developed for the movement of the maxillae and other dense, and articulated parts of their body. The muscular apparatus is most distinct and complicated in most of the rotiferous or wheel animalcules, and cor- responds with the high development of their nervous and other important sytems. There are numerous fasciculi at the anterior part of the body, for the movement of the long vibratile cilia which surround the mouth ; the maxillae are enveloped and moved by a strong muscular apparatus, which can be deeply retracted within the body by longitudinal bands, and similar longitudinal bands extend along the whole internal parietes of their body for the retraction and bending movements of the trunk. The muscles of these animals, though most distinct, are almost as colourless and transparent as the crystalline parietes of their body. They are carried through the water by a slow and gliding movement, produced by the rapid vibration of the long cilia which surround the anterior parts of their body, and these cilia while in action, appear like a revolving wheel from their forward, slower and more forcible movement being alone perceptible by the eye. The currents of water and the surrounding particles move in the same direction in which the circles appear to revolve. In the cirrhopods we find united in the same animals, both the articulated and the molluscous forms of the mus- cular system, and these are accompanied with a fixed con- dition of the exterior shell, and a high activity of the enclosed animal. The peduncle and the mantle present distinct musclar fibres, the dorsal part of the abdominal cavity near the head, is attached by several muscular fasciculi to the mantle and the shell, and a strong adductor muscle, as in bivalves, passes straight across from one moveable piece to the opposite. The fleshy parietes of the abdominal cavity, the conical tubular funnel prolonged from that cavity, and the haunches and innumerable tubular articulations of the cirrhi present distinct muscular fasiculi. In the pedun- culated forms, as in the pentalasmis, the whole of the con- vex dorsal part of the enclosed animal, is covered with crossing muscular fibres, which pass off in numerous sepa- rate fasciculi to be attached to the inside of the proximal, or closed part of the enveloping multivalve shell ; these draw the animal forcibly and quickly back into the shell after its body has been protruded for respiration or for food. The haunches of the jointed members, and the base of the funnel-shaped tube, also receive distinct muscles from this fleshy dorsal part of the cirrhopod for their varied movements. The annelides generally present a distinct muscular tunic of a complicated structure immediately beneath the outer tough and annulated integument, and intimately united to it, besides the muscular fasciculi appropriated to the motions of the lateral setae and cirrhi which extend from muscular sheaths. This subcutaneous muscular tunic is resolvable into distinct layers, and each of these into in- numerable separate fasciculi ; the most exterior of which have generally a transverse or an oblique direction, and the most interior a longitudinal course, as seen in the same part of the entozoa. These longitudinal muscles are more or less "distinctly divided into longitudinal bands, as those of the nematoid entozoa, and as we see even in the holothuria, the actinia and many other of the radiated animals. This muscular tunic of the annelides appears to act on the interior viscera, as well as on the external imperfectly developed segments. Its exterior layer is some- times double, the one portion consisting of oblique fasciculi and the other of tranverse, and both of these exterior to the usual internal layer of longitudinal fasciculi. The several muscles are disposed similarly in the different seg- ments of the same: worm, and even in different worms, in the larvae of insects, in myriapods, and in the segments of the trunk of most of the articulated classes of animals. In the common earth-worm, as in many others, the mus- cular sheaths for the extention and retraction of the short conical curved and pointed feet consist chiefly of radiating fibres which extend from around the base of these hollow spines. The fleshy lips of this animal are provided with several longitudinal and circular muscles appropriated to their varied movements, and the anus is distinctly furnished with levator and spincter muscles. From the aerial respiration and the higher general de- velopment of most of the entomoid articulata their mus- cular fibres are more dense and irritable, and from the greater consolidation and distinctness of their segments, their muscular fasciculi are more isolated and more me- thodically disposed, than in the softer trunks of the aquatic helminthoid tribes. The myriapods, like the worms, having their segments and their lateral appendices equally developed from the one extremity of the trunk to the other, without distinction of thorax and abdomen, present the greatest similarity in the muscular system throughout all their seg- ments, and the greatest resemblance to the disposition of that system in annelides and in the larvae of insects. More than four thousand distinct muscles are found in the larva of the common cossus ligniperda, and these are disposed in con- centric strata, the fasciculi of which are directed, some longi- tudinally some transversely, and others with various degrees of obliquity, passing, as in the trunk of most adult entomoid animals, from the concave inner surface of one segment, to the anterior enclosed margin of the next succeeding. As the extremities and wings for progressive motion become deve- loped from the thorax, the muscular apparatus of that por- tion of the trunk becomes more developed than in any other segments. In the annexed figure from Straus, representing the principal muscles of the trunk of the male cock-chaffer, melolontha vulgaris (Fig. 6*4,) we observe that the interior layer of muscles of the segments of the abdomen (/,) run in a longitudinal direction, like those of the helminthoid classes. The muscles of the abdominal segments consist generally of parallel short fasciculi, which retain the same breadth and form from their origin to their insertion ; but in the anterior part of the trunk, where the movements are more powerful, the muscles have generally a conical form, being broad at their origin, and tapering towards their point of insertion ; so that more muscles can be inserted into a limited point, to strengthen and vary its movements. This form is seen in the depressor muscle (a,) of the head, and in the lateral flexor (6,) of the same part. The fasciculi of the rotator (d } ) of the head are more parallel, but they converge to a point in the two portions of the levator capitis (e, y,) and in the inferior (c,) and the superior (f,) retractor of the corselet, the levator (a?,) of the corselet, and the levator obliquus (h,) of the jugular piece. The fasciculi are more parallel in the large and powerful depressor muscle (i,) of the wing, on which the flight of the insect so much depends, and also in the several portions of its broad levator muscles (k.) The same tapering and pointed form is seen in most of the muscles in the region of the pelvis, or attached to the moveable pieces of the anus, as in the strong levator (n,) of the inferior anal piece, the retractor preputii (y,) the posterior retractor (/?,) of the inferior anal piece, and the retractor of the cloaca (o.) There is also great uniformity observed in the disposition of the flexor and extensor muscles in the ginglimoid articulations of the legs in all the entomoid classes, and in the more moveable rotating articu- lations of the antennee and palpi of these animals. The muscles of the trunk in these highest articulated classes, like those of the helminthoid forms, are still divided into bands, which occupy chiefly the dorsal and the ventral aspects of the body, and these are again partially divided on the median plain by the dorsal vessel above, and the nervous columns below ; and here, as in the vertebrated classes, we observe that these symmetrical and voluntary muscles do not cross the median plain of the body. They are connected through the medium of the skin to the solid coverings of the segments ; so that the exuviable skeleton is cast off in all these entomoid classes without affecting the insertions of the muscles into the true skin. In the air- breathing, pulmonated and tracheated arachnida we find the same dense, irritable, and serrated character of the muscular fibres as in the perfect insects, a similar structure of the muscles and their tendons, and the same general disposition of these organs where the articulations resemble. Their capaceous cephalo-thorax is occupied chiefly with the large and strong muscles of the haunches of their numerous long legs, and with those of their masticating and poisonous appa- ratus. The long cylindrical segments of the post-abdomen of the scorpions are chiefly occupied with the powerful muscles appropriated to the movement of the poisonous sting formed by the last segment of the trunk. The tendons of the muscles here, as in insects and Crustacea, are only calcified prolongations from the exterior skeleton. The muscular system of the Crustacea forms a larger proportion of their body than in the air-breathing articulata, and their move- ments are more rapid and powerful than in almost any other branchiated invertebrata ; their individual fibres, however, are softer, more white and pellucid, less compact in their texture, and less irritable and strong, than in the pulmo- nated or tracheated classes ; and they require less muscular force on account of the support which they receive from the density of the element through which they move. The muscular apparatus of their external organs of mastication and of locomotion closely resembles that of insects, but their stomach is covered with powerful muscles for the movement of the internal teeth with which it is provided ; the ventral portion of their post-abdomen is furnished with numerous and strong muscles for the movements of that part of the trunk in swimming, or for its retraction when alarmed ; and the muscles of the prehensile terminal parts of their legs, especially of the anterior pair, are proportionally large and strong for the contests in which they are continually en- gaged. FOURTH SECTION. Muscular System of the Cyclo-Ganliated, or Molluscous Classes. The limited extent and the aquatic nature of the respira- tion in most of the molluscous classes, and their fixed con- dition, or imperfect means of locomotion, are accompanied with a corresponding low degree of vitality and imperfect development of their muscular system. The forms also of this system, as of the whole body, vary much more in this than in the articulated or vertebrated divisions of the animal kingdom. Within the exterior cartilaginous covering of the tunicated animals is placed their muscular coat by which they are able to contract their whole body, and forcibly to expel the contents of their respiratory or thoracic cavity. This muscular enveloping tunic, as seen in that of the cyn- thia pupa (Fig. 65,) consists chiefly of long diverging fasciculi which originate from around the two orifices of the sac (a. b,) and extend round the whole body of the animal. These muscular fasciculi are attached to various points of the exterior tunic, but most intimately around the respiratory (#,) and the anal ( b, ) orifices, which we observe also to be provided with distinct and strong sphincter muscles (d, e,) passing in a circular man- ner around them. By the contraction of the whole of this muscular tunic, the orifices are retracted, the trunk of the animal is compressed, the respiration trunk is emptied, and the whole body is retracted towards the fixed point to which the animal is attached. The respiratory currents are produced by the vibratile cilia, disposed on the branchiee, and on the thoracic cavity, as in other acephalous mollusca, and the swimming of some of the aggregate forms, as of the pyrosoma, is effected by the same respiratory cur- rents produced by vibratile cilia. The muscular coat of the tunicata is analogous to the mantle of bivalves, as their cartilaginous covering is the analogue of the shell. The conchiferous animals are much more generally free than the tunicata, and some of them possess considerable power of locomotion. The movements are chiefly performed by the foot, which is commonly a lengthened tongue- shaped, muscular organ, capable of being protruded to some distance from the cavity of the mantle, and capable of as- suming a great variety of forms. By this organ the con- chifera attach their byssus, swim at the surface of the water, creep on a solid surface, burrow in sand, or other soft material, and extricate themselves when covered. The foot is composed of muscular fasciculi, which decussate each other in various directions to give it great variety of movements, and water is often ad- mitted into its interior cavity. It is sometimes wanting where the shell is permanently fixed to a spot, as in the oyster. It is generally more or less connected with the dorsal part of the valves, and the fibres of its expanded base embrace almost the whole of the abdominal cavity. The adductor muscles are the active organs by which the valves are closed against the elastic property of the ligament, and they generally consist of one or two thick, short, and strong muscles, which pass straight across the ventral surface of the abdomen, to be at- tached ta the inner surface of both valves. The pecten is enabled to swim backwards by the powerful and repeated action of its adductor muscle on the valves. The adductor muscle is large and single in most of the round forms of conchifera, as the pecten, ostrea, anomia, spondylus, but in the more lengthened forms there are generally at least two. This marginal muscle consists of numerous small fasciculi attached along this groove in both valves, and spreading chiefly on the loose ventral margins of the mantle. By forcibly retracting this part of the mantle, these palleal muscles contract the respiratory sac, so as to assist in a forced expiration of the contained water, and they protect the most sensitive marginal part of the mantle from being compressed and injured during the closing of the valves. The currents of water which are conveyed into the cavity of the mantle through the respiratory orifice, and outwards through the vent, for the purposes both of respiration and nourishment, are entirely produced by the rapid action of vibratile cilia, which are disposed in the closest arrangement around all the minutest meshes of the branchiae, and cover all the fringed edges of the respiratory orifice and nearly the whole inner surface of the respiratory cavity of the mantle. As all other vibra- tile cilia, these continue in lively activity on portions of the gill or mantle which have been long cut from the body of the animal. The respiratory cavity of the mantle, with highly contractile muscular parietes, is often prolonged to a great distance beyond the margin of the valves, es- pecially in burrowing species, to reach with the respiratory and anal orifices, the surface of the bed or rock in which the animal is concealed. Besides the usual large adductor muscles, there are frequently smaller supplementary trans- verse muscular bands passing from the dorsal part of one valve to the other. The muscular foot of the gasteropods sometimes covers the whole ventral surface of the body, and sometimes ex- tends only from the under surface of the neck ; it is the largest muscle of the body, and that by which progressive motion is effected both in creeping and swimming. This tractor muscle forms the only bond of con- nection between the shell and the animal it contains, and it is constantly advancing slowly along the pillar of the shell dur- ing growth like the adductor muscles of conchifera. The open mantle which secretes the calcareous matter of the shell is also distinctly muscular and contractile, and the funnel for respiration is an open canal prolonged from its left side. The foot is often expanded by the introduction of water into its interior cavity, and its dorsal surface secretes the calca- reous or horny layers which compose the operculum of the shell. The neck forms generally a thick muscular sheath around the complex apparatus of the mouth and proboscis, and supports on the right side the muscular exciting organ of the male ; anteriorly it forms the lips or the sheath of the pro- boscis, and the tentacula which have generally the eyes at the exterior of their base. In the naked gasteropods found generally adhering to floating plants in the ocean, as the scyll&a and tritonia, the foot forms a long narrow groved organ for em- bracing the tender stems to which they adhere, and on which they feed. Most of the predaceous gasteropods possess a long and powerful muscular proboscis capable of being ex- tended to a distance from the mouth, and provided at its ex- tremity with an exsertile bifid fleshy tongue armed with sharp conical recurved teeth, as seen in that of the common whelk, buccinum undatum (Fig. 66.) Both the proboscis (g, g.) and the en- closed bilabiate spiny tongue (a, b.) are provided with numerous powerful ex- tensor and retractor muscles contained in the neck. The two divisions (a.) of the tongue to which the teeth are at- tached are often supported internally by two long cartilaginous laminae, large and strong in the buccinum, which appear to be the analogues of the gastric dart of conchifera. The phytophagous gas- teropods have generally jaws for com- pressing their vegetable food, or a long spiny tongue for filing it to pieces. The muscular system of the pteropods, like that of many of the floating gasteropods, is generally soft, transparent, and nearly colourless ; so that the disposition of the fibres in the exterior closed mantle, and in the fin-like arms can be per- ceived through the outward pellucid coverings of the body. Having no muscular foot for creeping, their progressive mo- tion depends on the movement of two muscular membranes, unsupported by rays or by cartilage, and extending from the sides of the body. These muscular fins are developed both in the naked and the testaceous forms, they present the most favourable situation for the branchiae which are generally placed on their surface, and they sometimes serve as organs of prehension, embracing the surface of plants, and other objects floating through the sea. The muscular mantle, closed above, forms a large abdominal cavity, and its con- tractions assist in expelling the natural excretions of the vis- cera, or in retracting the whole body within the shell. The tentacula also, and the whole apparatus of the head, are re- tracted and extended by their own muscular fibres, and the oesophagus is sometimes provided with a distinct muscular bulb, like many gasteropods. The annexed figure, (Fig. 6'7,) represents two naked and two testaceous forms of pteropods, with their muscular organs of motion extended laterally from the sides of the trunk, and placed more anteriorly than those of the naked cephalopods. In the clio australis, (Fig. 67, A) the form approaches very closely to the cephalopodic in the numerous conical, tubular,cephalic tentacula (A,a,a*,) the form of the head (#,) the position of the eyes, and the lengthened cylindrical form of the trunk, enveloped in a closed muscular mantle (d.) The muscular fins (c,) support, on their pectinated surface, the numerous ramifications of the branchial vessels ; so that the motions of these organs promote the aeration of the blood. In the pneumodermon, (Fig. 67. B,) the muscular pro- boscis (0,) and the lateral tufts of tentacula (b 9 ) terminated each by a sucker, are retractile, the muscular arms (c,) are ex- tended from the sides of an anterior division of the trunk, and the branchiae (d,) are placed, as in the doris, on the pos- terior part of the back, but at a distance from the anus, which here opens on the anterior part of the right side, as in the clio. The muscular arms are comparatively large in the small testaceous cleodora, (Fig. 6'7- C. b,) as they are also in the testaceous cymbulia, represented in Fig. 24. The fleshy mantle of the cleodora extends laterally to a distance from the sides of the head (,) and the slender pellucid, depressed, tapering shell (c,) is also expanded transversely with deeply grooved sides. The fins for progressive motion are more lengthened and straight in their form in the minute testa- ceous cuvieria (Fig. 6J . D. a,) where there are dentiform masticating buccal organs, as in a cephalopod, and in which the shell (c,) is straight, lengthened, conical, and pointed, like a belemnite. The muscular organs of these and the other known forms of pteropods, are constructed, like their shells, on the plan of those of the cephalopods, especially of the lower forms of that class. The organs of motion in the cephalopods, as in the ptero- pods, are generally in form of muscular fins extending from the sides of the trunk, and unsupported by osseous rays ; they move also by means of the muscular feet developed from the fleshy disk surrounding the head. The nautilus, like a gasteropod, is fixed by two lateral muscles to the bot- tom of its shell, its muscular open mantle is thin and deli- cate, the muscular funnel is open beneath throughout its whole length, and the mouth, surrounded with strong mus- cles for the calcified jaws, is provided with broad muscular feet, like the expanded feet of an argonaute, and supporting numerous sheathed tentacula. In the argonaut a, (Fig. 68. A,) there are eight muscular long feet provided with large sessile suckers, as in other octopods. The ventral, or anterior sur- face of the body is directed towards the concave or spiral side of the shell, as in the planorbis, and other mollusca with orbicular shells, and the dorsal part of the animal with the expanded pair of membranous feet are placed next to the convex outer margin of the shell (a.) The mantle is spotted externally, as in the naked cephalopods, and is des- titute of muscular fins, as seen in Fig. 68. B, which repre- sents the animal removed from the shell. The shell cover- ing a part of the body has been observed by Poli in the ovum, as represented in Fig. 68. C. a. The muscular por- tion of the posterior pair of feet (Fig. 68. B. gj) and the gradually diminishing sessile suckers are continued around the margin of the expanded membranous part (Fig. 68. A. h,) so that this pair of feet may be employed as organs of pre- hension, or for creeping at the bottom, or for swimming beneath or above the surface of the water. Here, as in the naked cephalopods, there is a thin panniculus carnosus immediately beneath the coloured skin of the mantle, the fibres of which interlace to form a thin recticulate tunic. The parietes of the mantle are chiefly composed of longitu- dinal muscular fibres, with a thin external and transverse layer. The external and internal muscles of the abdominal fins in the naked species, both those which connect these organs with the trunk, and those which move their free mar- gins, are inserted into two thin longitudinal cartilaginous scapular plates. The palleal muscles are not inserted into the shell of the argonaute, nor into the internal dorsal shells of the naked cephalopods, as they are in the nautilus. The upper margin of the mantle is attached behind to the cepha- lic cartilage in the sepiola and the octopus, but is free in sepia, loligo, and loligopsis. The cavity of the abdomen is partially divided by two strong and broad muscular bands extending downwards and forwards from the base of the funnel to be attached to the anterior parietes of the sac. These two strong longitudinal muscular columns, between which the rectum passes forwards to the base of the syphon, serve to contract longitudinally the cavity of the mantle, to limit the extent of its dilatations, and to retract the funnel. There are other muscular bands passing down from the back part of the head to the base of the funnel at its posterior part. The folds of peritoneum, which attach the branchiae to the sides of the abdominal cavity, have distinct muscular fasciculi, for raising and retracting these organs. The whole muscular parietes of the abdominal sac are firm, white, arid remark- ably compact, and besides their transverse and longitudinal muscular layers, there are oblique and straight short fibres, which pass through their thickness from one surface to the other. Within the abdominal cavity a distinct muscular tunic embraces the whole liver and oesophagus as far as the gizzard, and connects them with the upper and back part of the trunk. The strongest and the largest muscles of the naked cephalopods are those which are attached around the head, connecting that part with the trunk behind, and with the arms before. Strong muscular bands pass upwards from the back and fore parts of the trunk, and expand into radiat- ing fasciculi, which enter into the bases of the feet. The funnel consists chiefly of two strata of muscular fibres, the inner of which is transverse, and the outer longitudinal. In the annexed front view of the muscles of the argonaute, (Fig. 69,) the funnel (e,) is folded down over the fore part of the abdomen (/,) and its strong posterior muscular bands (d, d,) are seen passing down- wards from its base. The anterior ascending radiating fasciculi (a,) cross each other at the bases of the feet, so as to interlace and mingle their fibres before they enter into the compo- sition of these organs. These muscular fibres are more straight and parallel as they advance along the feet (b 9 ) en- veloping the trunks of the vessels and nerves which are seen ramifying on the ex- panded terminal membrane (c,) of the posterior pair of feet. The suckers in two rows, as on the other feet, continue around the margin of these expanded terminations of the posterior pair. All the naked cephalopods are octopods, like this testaceous argonaute, having only eight feet developed from the muscular disk surrounding the mouth ; but many of the genera, as sepia, loligo, and sepiola, have also two long muscular tentacula, which have a deeper origin near the car- tilaginous orbits, and from these superadded pediform tenta- cula, such genera have been considered as decapods. The rudimentary eye-lids of the naked cephalopods are already surrounded with distinct orbicular muscles, and the eye- balls are moved by four recti muscles, and sometimes by an inferior oblique, arising from the base of the orbits around the optic nerves. The tentacula have generally pedunculated muscular suckers developed on their inferior surface, at their free extremities, like those of the feet in the tentaculated species of this class. The muscular suckers are sessile, large, and strong, on the long feet of the octopods, as the argonauts and the octopus, they adhere to external objects by the close application of their thick muscular margins, and by forming a partial vacuum in their centre. By these organs the cepha- lopods can creep upwards on a vertical surface, even when out of the water. The octopus, destitute of any lateral fins, is assisted in swimming by muscular membranes extended between the bases of the feet ; this animal swims backwards by impelling the water forwards, but the species which have lateral fins extending from their trunk can swim with ease either forwards or backwards, and they appear to spring up- wards sometimes, to a distance from the surface of the sea. These predacious animals have very powerful muscles con- nected with the mastication of their food, as well as with its prehension. Large sphincter muscles, with a fimbriated fleshy lip, surround the entrance of the mouth, and strong retractor muscles of the jaws are inserted around the reso- phageal opening of the cranium. The bases of the jaws are surrounded with superimposed strata of powerful compressor muscles, and the short, thick, fleshy tongue, covered with numerous rows of sharp, conical, horny spines, is moved by strong muscles attached to a rudimentary os hyoides. The maxillary apparatus is also provided with two lateral rotator muscles, which pass forwards to be inserted into its anterior part. FIFTH SECTION. Muscular System of the Spini-Cerebrated or Vertebrated Classes. The muscular system is placed on the exterior of the hard parts in the vertebrated animals ; its fibrous structure is here the most distinct and irritable, and its separate muscles and fasciculi are most obvious and defined. The muscles have generally a red colour, from the red blood sent through them, and they are connected with the bones, for the most part, by tendinous prolongations. They are most pale, soft, and pellucid, in fishes, where their feebleness is compensated for by the great number which co-operate in the same move- ment. The progression of fishes being effected chiefly by the lateral motions of the tail and of the trunk, the vertebral column is expanded vertically upwards and downwards, and the great muscles of the trunk are disposed in transverse strata along its sides, like those which move the segments of a worm or an insect. The feeble irritability of the muscular fibres in fishes, their softness, and their colourless transpa- rency, correspond with their common conditions in the inver- tebrata, and in the embryos of the higher vertebrated classes, and they accord with the still soft condition of the bones into which they are inserted. Aided in their ascent and descent in the water by the compression and expansion of their air- sac, and with very imperfectly developed arms and legs, the active movements of fishes are but little varied, their mus- cles seldom divide into fasciculi, or terminate in narrow ten- dons to be attached to small points of their feeble skeleton. The fibres which compose the great lateral muscles of the trunk run in a longitudinal direction, are divided into nu- merous transverse oblique strata by intervening tendinous aponeuroses, and are disposed chiefly in four series of oblique muscles, as seen in the perch, (Fig. /O. a, b, c, d.) The in- tervening white tendinous bands which connect these strata of muscles have a crescentic form, are disposed vertically along the sides of the vertebrae and the ribs, and are attached externally by their zig-zag margin to the inner surface of the skin. The upper series (,) have their thin white tendons directed obliquely downwards and backwards, the second (b } ) downwards and forwards, the third (c 9 ) like the first, and the fourth (?,) like the second. The upper series of lateral muscles (#,) attached anteriorly to the occipital bone, occupy the deep cavity on each side of its projecting spine, and extend backwards to the longitudinal diverging tendons and muscles of the caudal fin, in which they terminate. The oblique direction of all these lateral muscles increases the velocity of their motions, as in the intercostals of quadru- peds. These strata of muscles are arched backwards, having all their convex surfaces directed forwards, and as their fibres pass obliquely backwards and peripherad, they draw their cutaneous attachments forwards and inwards when the ver- tebrae are the fixed points. They are attached also to the temporal bone and to the back part of the scapular arch, and the inferior series (d,) extends forwards under the arms (n,) to the os hyoides. The layers of these large lateral muscles of the trunk are seen similarly disposed in the cylindrical body of the cyclostome fishes, in the compressed trunk of most of the osseous forms, and also in the broad depressed body of the flat fishes. They correspond with the vertebrae into which their aponeuroses are inserted, and they are at once analogous to the muscles of the segments of articulata and to the more lengthened and isolated muscles of the ver- tebral column and trunk in higher vertebrated classes. The flat surfaces of the interspinous bones (/,) are covered with diverging muscular fibres, which pass downwards and move them in every direction, and exterior to these are larger dis- tinct muscular fasciculi which are inserted into the broad bases of the rays of the median fins, for their varied move- ments. The longitudinal straight muscles which extend along the median line of the dorsal and the abdominal sur- face of the trunk are interrupted by the dorsal and anal fins. The longitudinal straight muscle of the back in fishes generally commences from each side of the spine of the occipital bone, and proceeds in two separate fasciculi to be inserted into the base of the anterior ray of the first dorsal fin. When there are more than one dorsal fin, it is extended in two fasciculi from the last ray of each of these fins to the first ray of the next, and it is continued in the same manner (#,) from the last dorsal to the beginning of the caudal fin. On the ven- tral surface of the body, the first pair of straight muscles generally pass from the scapular arch or the humeri to the anterior part of the pelvis, the second pair (e,) commence from the pelvis, and passing on each side of the anus, con- tinue to the first ray of the anal fin (h.) They are developed between the anal fins, as between the dorsal, when there are more than one, and from the last ray of the posterior anal fin they are continued backwards to the beginning of the caudal fin. By these longitudinal straight muscles above and below, the median fins are moved and supported, and the trunk is moved in a vertical plane. The sides of the head are occupied by two large and powerful muscles, (&, /,) apparently analogous to the masseter and the temporal muscles, and which pass forwards and downwards to be in- serted into the lower jaw. The lower jaw is depressed both by muscles passing backwards from it to the os hyoides, and by those which extend from the os hyoides to the scapular arch. The operculum is raised by two or more short and broad muscles, placed at its upper part, and is depressed by short round muscles placed on the inner surface of the same part. The branchiostegal rays are moved by short oblique muscles, which descend from the opercular bones to these rays, and by others which are interposed obliquely between each pair of rays, like intercostal muscles in higher classes. The branchial arches, in the osseous fishes, are attached by dis- tinct muscles to the back part of the skull, to the sides of the vertebrae, and also to the scapular arch and the os hyoides. In the cartilaginous fishes, where there is no oper- culum over the branchiae, that apparatus is covered exter- nally with a layer of short muscles, like intercostals, passing between soft cartilaginous bands, like ribs. The pectoral fins, or arms, have on each of their flat surfaces a band of adductor and abductor muscles, (Fig. 71-/>) which extend from the scapular arch to the commencement of the pha- langes or rays. These muscles act also as flexors and exten- sors of the arms, and correspond with the magnitude of these organs ; they are greatest in the expanded pectoral fins of the plagiostome fishes. The ventral fins or feet are also moved by two similar muscles on each of their flat surfaces, extending from the pelvic bones to the com- mencement of the rays, and corresponding in size and strength with the magnitude of the feet. The anguillifo fishes want the feet and their muscular apparatus, and the cyclostome fishes want also the arms and their muscles. The muscular system is greatly relieved in the vertical motions of most fishes by the compression and expansion of their air-sac ; but many of the fiat fishes and the cyclostome species are destitute of this aid, and lie generally at the bottom of the water. The movement of some fishes through the water is aided by a muscular disk in form of a sucker, placed on the back part of the head in the remora, on the fore part of the belly in the lump-suck- er, and around the mouth in the lam- preys, by which they adhere to other animals or bodies moving through the water. By the great development of the lateral muscles of the trunk, the saw-fish and the sword-fish are enabled to use their offensive weapons with effect ; the large muscles of the anterior dorsal rays give powerful and varied movements to these parts in the silurus, balistes, lophius, and many other fishes, and the strength of those of the pectoral fins enable the flying-fishes to escape from the water, and to move some hundred times their own length through the air. The long compressed trunks of the perenni-branchiate amphibia, as the proteus, the siren, and the axolotl, and of the tadpoles of the higher anurous species, are moved through the water chiefly by the lateral motions of the ver- tebral column and of the tail, as in fishes^ and these motions are effected in the same manner by numerous transverse strata of longitudinal muscular fibres, occupying chiefly the sides of the trunk. These great lateral muscles are still comparatively pale, bloodless, and feeble, and the tendinous intersections of their strata are thin, soft, and delicate. The cellular substance interposed between the muscles of amphi- bia is scanty, of little consistence, colourless, and almost in a semifluid state ; there are yet few tendons connecting the muscles to the soft bones of the skeleton, and there is gene- rally very little connexion between the skin and the sub- jacent muscles of the body. The general disposition of the superficial muscles in the urodelous amphibia is seen on re- moving the skin from the common crested triton, triton cris- tatus (Fig. 72.) In the back view of the trunk (Fig. 72. 1,) short transverse strata of lateral muscles (b,) separated from each other by thin, soft, tendinous aponeuroses, are seen occupying the dorsal portion of the body, from the occipital bone to the posterior extremity of the tail. The muscular strata (c,) which descend from these in a more oblique direction down- wards and backwards, are united together on the fore part of the abdomen (Fig. 72. 2. b,) to form a large continuous descending oblique muscle. But behind the anus (2. c,) the tendinous inter- sections (2. d,) continue distinct along the tail, below the vertebral column as well as above it. In the rigid state of these lateral muscles in the tadpoles, as in that of the rana paradoxa, the sides of the trunk are marked by trans- verse vertical furrows, similar to those on the sides of fishes. We perceive also in the tadpoles, as in fishes, a thin vertical prolongation of the skin along the upper and lower surfaces of the tail, like dorsal and anal fins, but unsupported by rays. The recti abdominis of the tadpoles form a broad muscular expansion covering the fore part of the trunk, di- vided by several transverse tendinous intersections, and tapering to the pelvis. These two muscles become more contracted and narrow in the adult animal. In the salaman- der strong muscular fasciculi descend from the free ends of the short ribs of the trunk, and expanding as they pass over the abdomen, they unite to form a continuous external oblique. The muscles of the extremities are more developed in these animals, to support them on land, than in the tritons and other aquatic species, w r here they are little used for pro- gressive motion. In the anurous species, in their adult state, the muscular system is the most remote from that of fishes in its general characters and in the disposition of its parts, which arises from their greater extent of respiration, their inhabiting a rarer medium, the great development of their extremities, and the large portion of the trunk which they lose by their metamorphosis. Their muscles are more vascular, dense, red-coloured and strong, more distinct and defined in their course and in their insertions, more ventri- cose, seldom exhibiting parallel strata, and generally inserted into distinct and often lengthened tendons. From the leap- ing and swimming habits of many of these species, we per- ceive their short trunk terminated by lengthened and strong legs and provided generally with less perfectly developed arms, and the greater development of the extensors than of the flexors of the legs, gives an anthropoid character to these extremities. In the back view of the muscular system of the common frog, rana esculenta (Fig. 73,) the small size of levatores scapulae, (1. 2,) corresponds with the soft and feeble condition of the dorsal portion of these bones into which they are inserted. The depressor of the lower jaw (5,) the sca- pular (6,) and the sub-sca- pular muscles (8,) occupy the anterior part of the back immediately behind the head, having before them the broad temporal muscles, and be- hind them the quadratus lumborum, (19, 24,) the sa- cro lumbalis, (23,) and the dorsal portion of the obliquus externus (22.) The ilio-coccy- geus, (25, 26,) is of great length, like the coccygeal bone, and the ilium to which it is attached, and the transversus abdominis (20,) extends over a large portion of the trunk from the want of ribs in these anurous amphibia. The inter-transversales (21.) are of considerable breadth, from the length of the transverse processes of the vertebrae. The pectoralis major, here of great size and strength, is divided into several distinct parts, which extend forwards, inwards, and backwards, as separate flat muscular bands, covering a great portion of the anterior surface of the trunk. The muscles of the os hyoides are of great size, as in fishes and the lower amphibia, from the size of that bone, and its importance in respiration where there are no ribs. The pec- toralis minor is also divided into several detached and di- verging muscular bands, like the external, arid both these muscles acquire increased influence on the arm by their low insertion on the short humerus. The deltoid (7,) the anco- nei (9, 10,) and most of the proximal muscles of the arm are strong ventricose masses, and even the flexors and extensors of the wrist and fingers are short and fleshy, giving an an- thropoid character to these members. The knees extend, not forwards as in most vertebrata, but directly outwards from the sides of the trunk, and the long webbed feet have the same lateral direction, the best adapted for swimming and leaping. The glutei muscles (27,) are here long and narrow, from the lengthened and cylindrical form of the iliac bones, and also the iliaci muscles (28, 37,) and the semi- tendinosus (33,) the semi-membranosus (31,) and other ex- tensors of the thigh. The recti (29,) and the vasti muscles (40,) and the other extensors of the knee-joint, and also the gastrocnemius (34,) the tibialis posticus (42,) the peronei (48,) and other extensor muscles of the heel are here of great size, and of great importance in the progressive motions of these animals both on land and in the water, and by their great development they give a rotundity to the thighs and to the calfs, unusual in the cold-blooded vertebrata. The plantar aponeurosis is here continued from the tendo achilles, which has a moveable sesamoid bone where it plays over the heel ; so that the great extensors of the heel-joint contribute like- wise to the flexion of the toes, and the general support of the long webbed feet in swimming through the water, or in leaping on the ground. The higher classes of air-breathing vertebrata, by respiring a purer element and by possessing organs more extensive, and more complicated, for the aeration of their blood, have their muscular system encreased in energy and strength be- yond that of the fishes and amphibia, which, for the most part, are organized to move by means of their vertebral column, through an element nearly of the same specific gravity as themselves. The rarity of the medium through which most of the reptiles and higher animals move, neces- sitates this increased muscular strength, and their bones have an increased solidity proportioned to the greater force of the muscles which are to act upon them. The progres- sive motion of serpents, like that of fishes, depends upon the movements of their trunk, and their muscles are disposed so as to act with most effect on the sides of the vertebrae and on the ribs. The deep grooves along the back, between the spinous and the transverse processes on each side, are occupied chiefly with the multifidus spina, the spi- nales, and the semi-spinales dorsi, which inflect powerfully the column to either side. Short as the distance is from one spinous process to another, and between the short transverse processes which support the ribs, those parts are moved se- parately by strong interspinales and intertransversales mus- cles. The ribs being free at their distal extremities, they admit of extensive motion, and are furnished with large in- tercostal muscles which partly represent the oblique and transverse muscles of the abdomen in higher animals. The recti muscles are divided in front by the soft cartilaginous tapering extremities of the ribs, as they are by tendinous in- tersections in most of the higher animals. These intercostal muscles, of various lengths, some passing directly from one rib to the next, and others passing over one or more ribs, to have a more distant insertion, are strongest on the anterior portion of the trunk, where their action is important in res- piration, by compressing and expanding the respiratory sacs. The large imbricated abdominal scuta, so important in the progression of serpents, are moved and supported by dis- tinct muscular fibres, which pass down to their fixed ex- tremities. Many of the ordinary muscles of the head, as seen in that of the rattle- snake (Fig. 74,) have a lengthened and divided form in serpents, from the elongated form and the great mobility of most of the bones of that part. An- terior to the external pterygoid (&,) and the digastric (h,) muscles are seen three separate parts of the temporal muscle (d, e,f.) A portion of this muscle (e,) extending forwards like a buccinator, embraces the posterior part of the poison- gland (a,) and forces the secretion into the duct (#*,) and thence into the perforated fang (b.) The strong muscles of the lower jaw (/, w,) extend upwards to the vertebrae and backwards to the ribs, and unite into a single band on their fore part. The row of salivary glands (b, c,) extend back- wards beneath the poison gland (,) and forwards before the masseter muscle (a.) The great length of all the muscles of the head and trunk of serpents contributes to the velocity of their movements, and their numerous subdivisions contribute to the variety of their motions. Their muscles, for the most part, terminate in narrow, shining, tendinous bands, which allows of a greater number of muscles being inserted into a limited space, and consequently a greater variety in the movements of the articulations. These elongated forms, and tendinous terminations are most conspicuous in the ex- ternal and internal muscles of the ribs, which are the legs of these animals. The cloaca has its distinct muscles for opening and closing that cavity ; the pelvic bones and rudi- mentary feet, sometimes developed, are provided with mus- cles analogous to those of the ventral fins and pelvic bones of fishes ; the scapular arch, developed in the most per- fect species, is attached by muscles to the trunk, though not yet destined to support atlantal extremities, and the internal lateral muscles passing from the vertebras to the ribs, form the rudiment of a diaphragm. The muscles of saurian reptiles are more numerous and complicated than in ophidia, because they possess members for progressive motion, adapted sometimes for swimming and sometimes for running or climbing, and sometimes these animals are organized for moving through the air. The stratified disposition of the great lateral muscles of the trunk, so conspicuous in the fishes, the urodelous amphibia, and even in the serpents, is less marked in the comparatively motionless bodies of the saurian reptiles, excepting in those which have scarcely yet the members developed. This ar- rangement of the muscles, in regular series around the ver- tebrae, is still continued in the coccygeal region of the co- lumn, which, together with the neck, is more flexible than in the ophidia. Several muscles of the face are wanting on the rough and hard head of the crocodilian reptiles, their temporal and masseter muscles are protected externally by the temporal, frontal, and malar bones, and their insertions are on the inner surface of the lower jaw, the muscles of the os hyoides, and those which connect the head with the trunk are distinct and powerful, as in most reptiles, and those of the tail, which is nearly as thick as the trunk, are of great strength, for the lateral motions of that part in swimming. The short muscular legs of these animals, diverging out- wards, scarcely raise the trunk oif the ground, on which the saurians, and most other reptiles rest the body, when not in actual progression. The legs, in these aquatic sauria, are compressed in form, to facilitate their advancement in the water, as in web-footed birds, and they have strong extensor muscles, to give impulse to their webbed feet. More nimble movements, and more light and pliant forms of the locomotive organs and of the wholebody are seen in most of the terrestrial, climbing, long-toed,and long-tailed lacertine sauria. The direc- tion outwards of the humerus and femur weakens the limbs, and adapts them better for climbing and prehension than for support or for running. The long fingers and toes, with their powerful flexors in the lacertine sauria, adapt them for climbing on trees in pursuit of their prey. The opposed fingers and toes, and the muscular prehensile tail of the chamoelion enable it to creep with security on the agitated branches ; the muscles of its eyes are not synchronous in their movements, by which it commands an extensive field of vision without moving its head, and the muscular, clavate, prehensile tongue is moved w r ith velocity, like a sheath to and fro, from the long body of the os hyoides. The power- ful intercostals of the flying dragon expand its ribs with their connecting skin, and move them like wings, to enable it to pursue its insect prey through the air. The saurian reptiles, possessing a more distinct cervical region than any of the inferior vertebrata, and often carrying bulky prey to a distance in their jaws, require a great development of the muscles which suspend and move their heavy head and neck, as the recti and obliqui muscles of the head, the splenii, sca- leniy complexus and serratus posticus, the inter- and semi-spi- nales colli, the transversalis, trapezius, and rhomboideus. The fibres of ihepanniculus carnosus are intimately connected with the large osseous, external plates of the loricated croco- dilian reptiles, but the skin is more free in the lacertine spe- cies. The external and internal obliqui abdominis and the transversalis are distinct in the crocodiles, and also a rudi- ment of the diaphragm. The posterior portion of the diaphragm is likewise perceived in the dragons and geckos, where it consists of muscular bands ascending from the bo- dies of the vertebree to be attached to the ribs before them. Many of the ordinary muscles of the trunk are wanting in the chelonian reptiles, from the immobility of the skeleton in that part of the body, especially in the land species. Se- veral muscles of the face are deficient from the immoveable horny covering of the jaws and lips, and from the close ap- plication of the horny scales to the periosteum in that part. The muscles on the dorsal part of the spine, and all the in- tercostals, are likewise deficient. Those of the cervical, sa- cral, and coccygeal regions, and those of the scapular and pelvic arches, together with the muscles of the arms and legs, are the most distinct and powerful in this order, and correspond with the mobility of these parts, or the weight they have to sustain. The temporal muscles are covered over by the parietal bones in the turtles, but in the tortoises, where the whole head is easily withdrawn within the strong arched and capaceous carapace, these muscles are exposed on the sides of the cranium (Fig. 75. A.) as in warm-blooded animals. The orbicularis palpebrarum, (Fig. 75. A, a,) is here thin and feeble, and chiefly appropriated to the large moveable lower eye-lid. The oblique muscles of the eye-ball are also very small, while the recti and the suspensorius oculi, (Fig. 75. B. a) are more distinct and strong. The mylo-hyoideus (Fig. 75. A. by) and the latissimus colli (75. A. c,) here form a large panniculus carnosus, covering the whole of the lower part of the sides of the neck. The spinalis cervicis, (A. d,) here forms numerous strong detached bands, which prin- cipally support the head, and retract it, when alarmed, within the cavity of the trunk. Behind this muscle lies the inser- tion of the longus colli, (A. /,) which has a similar action on the neck. Between these extends downwards the latissimus dorsi, (A. e,) tapering to the humerus, before which is the extended latissimus colli, and the imperfect diaphragm, (A.#,) extending over the peritoneal covering of the lungs. The obliqui, (A. /,) and the transversales abdominis, (A. ,) are here of considerable extent, passing forwards around the abdominal cavity, beneath the sternum and the ribs, and assisting in respiration and in the discharge of all the natural excretions. Behind the diaphragmatic bands (B. /, m,) are the posterior insertions of the large retrahentes capitis et colli (B. k,) which extend forwards along the back part of the neck (B.,/,) to retract the head and neck under the ribs. As the ribs are immoveable, the motions of inspiration are ef- fected chiefly by the os hyoides, as in amphibia where the ribs are almost or completely wanting, and most of the mus- cles connected with that bone are large and distinct, like the parts of the os hyoides itself. The genio-hyoideus (B./.) forms a broad muscle extending forwards to the lower jaw, and the omo-hyoideus, (B. i y ) continues backwards as a broad muscular expansion, covering the lower part of the neck. The hyo-glossus, hyo-maxillaris, genio-glossus, are also here distinct, and the stemo-mastoideus, the digrasticus maxilla, trachelo-mastoideus, and most of the muscles which move the head, are well marked in these long-necked ani- mals. The large pectoral muscles have an extensive attach- ment to the interior of the sternum. Two broad muscles proceeding, in different directions, from the sternum to the pubic bones, and constituting the attrahens and retrahens pelvim on each side, appear to be the analogues of the recti abdominis. The serratus magnus, deltoides, sub- and super - scapularis, triceps, (A. <?,) and biceps (B. y } ) brachii, and most of the succeeding muscles of the arm and hand are powerful, especially in the land tortoises, where the arms are fixed in a state of pronation, the best suited to support the weight of the body. The flexor sublimis (A. r } ) forms a strong mus- cular band on the outside of the fore-arm. The broad ten- dons of the extensor communis digitorum manus, (A. s,) cover the back part of the carpus, and on the upper part of the fingers are the five strong extensores breves digitorum manus, (A. /.) The brachialis internus (B. #,) the palmaris, (B. z.) the flexor profundus, (B. 2,) and most of the flexor muscles of these extremities are strong, both for support and for digging. In the long, fin-like arms of the turtles, the mus- cles of the shoulders are those chiefly developed, while the muscles of the fore-arm and hand are very feeble, as in ceta- ceous animals. The ylutei (A. 0,) the iliacus internus, and the psoas, are strong muscles in the land species, as are almost all the extensors and flexors of the thigh-bone. The biceps cruris, (A.v,) and the semitendinosus, (A. w,) form long muscular bands behind the femur, and the rectus femoris, (A. #,) in front, which unites below with the vastus externus, (A. y,) the vastus internus, and the crureus, to be inserted into the tuberosity of the tibia, below the knee, by a common tendon. The sartorius (A. z,) semimembranosus, obturator, and graciliSy have here their usual position and action. The extensor communis digitorum pedis, (A. 1,) and the short ex- tensors of the four toes, (A. 5,) resemble the corresponding muscles of the hand. The peroneus, (A. 4,) the gastrocnemii (A. 3,) and the other extensors, are strong on the posterior as those on the anterior extremities in the tortoises, to support and move their heavy body on the land, but they are scarcely perceptible in the long flat fin-like feet of the turtles. The cloaca has its dilating and its sphincter muscles, and the highly moveable tail has its numerous flexors and its exten- sor muscles in the reptiles of this order, and even the glottis, the penis, and the clitoris, have already their accompanying muscles developed, as in higher animals. The muscles of birds are more red and vascular, more irritable and dense than in the cold-blooded vertebrata be- neath them, and they possess these properties in the greatest degree in the rapaceous tribes, where the respiration is great- est, and where all the functions are most energetic. This condition of the muscular system is required in birds, from the lightness of the medium through which they move, and from their quick and long continued movements through that element. The muscles are more feeble, pale, soft, and pala- table in the heavy, slow-moving, phytophagous tribes, where the condition of the bones and most of the other systems, mark an inferior or reptile state of development. The fleshy parts of the muscles are generally short and thick, especially in the arms and legs of birds, and their tendons are generally long, slender, dense, and often ossified, like many cartilagi- nous parts of the skeleton. The active, heavy, fleshy parts of the muscles being situate, for the most part, on or near the solid trunk of the bird, the extreme parts, so important for progression, are lightened by receiving and supporting only the long narrow tendons ; hence the long slender legs and the lightness of the arms in this class. As birds have nearly all the same general form and movements, there is remarkable uniformity in the muscular system throughout this class. Their trunk being almost as fixed as in the che- lonia, the muscles destined to move that part are here also very imperfectly developed, but its fixed condition affords the most advantageous attachment for the powerful muscles of the extremities, which have generally a very high origin. The arms and hands being entirely appropriated to flight, and the legs and feet being constructed chiefly for support, their long flexible neck and highly moveable head supply the place of anterior extremities for all ordinary purposes of prehension, and the cervical region is therefore strong, move- able, and muscular, like the trunk of a serpent. The face of the birds, from the imrnoveable horny sheaths which cover the exterior of the jaws, is like that of the crocodilian and chelonian reptiles, destitute of many muscles destined to move the fleshy lips in other classes. The temporal, (Fig. 76. ,) the masseter, and the pterygoid muscles are powerful in birds, and correspond with the great length and the mo- bility of their lower jaw ; they are stronger in the rapacious birds, from the resistance they have to overcome, and they are most unequally developed on the two sides of the head in the crossbills, which habitually draw the lower jaw to one side of the head. The large eyes in this class are moved by four recti muscles, as in mammalia, and have their middle portion surrounded, compressed, and rotated by two obliqui. The orbicularis palpebrarum, expanded over their large orbit, acts most on the lower eye-lid, as in inferior classes ; the lower eye-lid has also its small depressor, as the upper has its levator muscle, and the membrana nictitaus, with its long inferior tendon passing behind and over the ball, is moved with great velocity by its pyramidalis and quadratus muscles. The fixed condition of the dorsal vertebrae affords a more solid attachment to the muscles of the long neck, and in rapaceous birds, which frequently carry their prey suspended from their jaws, to a distance through the air, the neck is comparatively short and strong, and the muscles of great power which move these vertebrae, as seen in the annexed figure from Carus, representing the muscles of the falco y (Fig. 76-) The recti postici and antici, the obliqui capitis, the splenii capitis et colli, and the strong complexi (Fig. 76. c,) rotate the head on its single occipital condyle, and bend the neck to either side. The inter-transversales, inter- spinales, transversalis colli, spi- nales dorsi et colli, trapezius, cu- cullaris, biventur cervicis, rhom- boideus, trachelo-mastoideus, and scaleni muscles are also well marked in the flexible neck of birds, and important in the move- ments of this part of the skele- ton. The longus colli passes up- wards from the spinous processes of the lower cervical and ante- rior dorsal vertebra, to be in- serted into the transverse pro- cesses of most of the vertebrae of the neck. The external inter- costals are divided each into an anterior and a posterior, half by the osseous appendices extend- ing backwards from the margins of the ribs, and the internal in- tercostals extend backwards no farther than these appendices. The serrati, the latissimus dorsi, the obliquus externus, and inter- nus abdominis, the transversalis and most of the muscles con- fined to the trunk are feeble in this class. The broad thin recti abdominis, connected together by a broad linea alba, and destitute of tendinous intersections, diverge at their posterior or lower part, to be inserted into the detached and feeble pubic bones. The muscular parietes of the abdomen are here thin and feeble, and very short, from the greater portion of that ca- vity being covered and supported by the large sternum, and the muscular bands forming the rudimentary diaphragm ex- tend upwards and inwards from the margins of the sternal ribs, spreading like a thin aponeurosis over the peritoneum covering the abdominal surface of the lungs, as in many of the cold-blooded vertebrata. The iliacus is here a small muscle within the pelvis, and the psoas appears to be want- ing, but the glutei muscles are of great strength, having to support the whole weight of the trunk upon the posterior extremities alone, as in the human body. The tail is moved, and its feathers are expanded, by several lateral muscles both above and below the coccygeal vertebrae, extending from the sacrum to the spinous, and to the transverse pro- cesses, and extending to the bases of the large quill-feathers themselves. The anterior extremities, like the posterior, have the proximate muscles of great magnitude and strength, while the more distant muscles of these parts are compara- tively small and feeble, and those are especially strong which are placed on the fore part of the sternum, and effect the depression of the humerus, the most powerful and important movement in the flight of birds. The pectoralis major, (Fig. 76. d,)' covers nearly the whole surface of the sternum and its crest, and continues its origin along the edge of the cla- vicle, and the surface of the broad ligament which unites the clavicle to the upper margin of the sternum. The insertion of this muscle is extended along a great portion of the hu- meruSj and its magnitude corresponds most generally with the power of flight, and the rapaceous character of the spe- cies. The subclavius, the serrati, the subscapularis, and most of the muscles connected with the scapula, on the upper part of the shoulder, are small in birds as in reptiles, and correspond with the limited extent of surface of that bone. Beneath the extended pectoralis major are the long narrow pectoralis minor, and the coraco-brachialis, which, from its position, looks like a third pectoral muscle. The integuments on the fore part of the wing are expanded like a web, in the bent position of the arms, by two long elastic tendons which originate from a strong cutaneous muscle like a deltoid, extending from the scapula over the head of the hume- rus, (Fig. 76 d, e.) One of these tendons is short, and ex- tends only to a small distance beyond the lower end of the humerus, while the other extends to the wrist, as seen in the annexed figure of the wing of the common buzzard. In this back view of the muscles of the arm in a rapaceous bird, the small thin cucullaris, (a, a,) Is seen ex- tending outwards from the vertebral column, and above it the two divisions of the latitsimus dorsi, (c, d,) which cover also the infra spinatus, (b.} The short fleshy mass of the deltoid muscle (/",) extends to the middle of the humerus, and behind it is the long triceps extensor cubiti (g, h.) On the fore-arm are seen the fleshy parts of the extensor carpi radialis (i } ) with its long tendon passing over the end of the radius, the supinator radii brevis (k,) the strong extensor digi- torum communis (/,) and beneath this the extensor metacarpi ulnaris (m, n,) which has its long tendon inserted into the middle strong element of the single metacarpal bone in birds. Beneath the thumb is the very small flexor pollicis, and on the ulnar side of the long middle finger is the tendon of the abductor indicis which passes down fleshy between the long anchylosed metacarpal bone, and has its tendon inserted into the base of the last phalanx. The flexor indicis has its tendon inserted into the distal extremity of that phalanx (r.) The flexor carpi ulnaris (p,) passes fleshy along the ulnar side of the outer metacarpal bone, and the outer finger, con- sisting of a single minute phalanx, has its own flexor digiti minimi (s.) The muscles and articulations of the wing are chiefly adapted for adduction and abduction, and they admit of little flexion and extension, or promotion and supination, excepting at the head of the humerus ; so that the whole arm moves with greater solidity and effect as an organ of flight, and is more easily folded along the side of the trunk when in a state of repose. On the posterior extremities the extensor muscles are more developed than the flexors from the trunk being supported by these members alone in walk- ing. From the extent, and the fixed condition of the dorsal part of the pelvis, the extensors of the femur have a high origin and a lengthened form, and the glutens maximus, me- dius, and minimus are developed in this region, as in qua- drupeds. The glutens majcimus here reaches along the femur, as low as the fibula, passing below and behind the knee-joint. The only distinct abductor of the femur is the gemellus supe- rior^ which rotates the thigh outwards, and this muscle is deficient in many aquatic birds. The pyriformis, quadratus femoris, and obturator externus extend the femur, and are aided by a muscle analogous to the pectineus. The peroncus longus and the tibialis posticus, arising from the back part of pelvis, are connected below with the extensor tendon of the heel. The rectus femoris arising from the upper part of the pubis, continues its long tendon over the extensor tendon of the knee, and unites below with the common perforated flexor of the toes. The gracilis arises very low from the femur, and acts as an extensor of the knee, and the popliteus, directed transversely, is situated high on the tibia. The foot is raised by the tibialis anticus, which passes from the tibia to the metatarsal bone, and rotates the foot inwards in the climb- ing movements of the zygodactylous birds ; these birds have likewise the peroneus brevis of considerable size, which arises from the exterior of the tibia and fibula, and rotates the foot outwards. The gastrocnemius, (Fig. 76. u,) arises from the condyles of the femur, and passes down thick and fleshy to the broad aponeurotic tendon of the heel, which forms a groove for the passage of the flexor tendon of the toes, and is inserted below into the long metatarsal bone. Behind the tibialis anticus (Fig. 76. r,) arises the fleshy head of the ex- tensor longus digit orum, (Fig. 76- ,) the tendon of which, bound down by strong ligaments in its course, divides at the lower end of the metatarsal bone, into three separate ten- dons, which proceed along the upper part of the toes to be inserted into the base of each terminal phalanx. The pos- terior toe has a distinct extensor muscle which descends from the upper part of the metatarsal bone, and is inserted into both phalanges. The long flexor of the toes descending from the upper part of tibia exterior to the gastrocnemius, is con- nected with two cartilages at the heel-joint, which represent the astragalus and the calcaneum, and which I have found in the ostrich, in the condition of a large, solid, sesamoid bone. The muscular system of the mammalia is greatly diversi- fied by the variety of forms and habits of the animals which compose this class, some of which are organized to move like fishes through the ocean, some to burrow in the earth or to walk on its surface, or to climb on trees, and others to fly like birds through the air. The differences here presented by the muscular system relate therefore chiefly to the organs of motion, which vary according to the nature and situation of the food. The fleshy parts of the muscles in mammalia are generally large and strong, and proportioned to the more massive bones of the skeleton, and the encreased weight of the whole trunk. The respiration being less extensive here than in birds, the tem- perature is inferior, the tendons are less inclined to ossify, the circulation is slower, the muscular fibres are less dense, and their contractions are less energetic, and the muscles compensate for their defective energy by their increase of bulk, which gives a rotundity to the exterior form of the body, and more massive proportions to all the parts of these animals. As the cetaceous animals breathe by lungs, and not by gills, like fishes, the muscles of their vertebral column are disposed chiefly for movements in a vertical plane, and not for horizontal motions, like those of the water-breathing fishes. The great elevation and breadth of the occipital region of the cranium afford an extensive surface of attachment, as in fishes, for the powerful muscles of their short fixed neck, and extended moveable trunk. From the great length of the transverse and spinous processes of nearly all the vertebrae of the trunk, there is a large angular space on each side of the column, for the numerous long and pow- erful muscles which move the caudal vertebrae, and the tail, and the fleshy bodies of these muscles are very indistinctly separated from each other, from the general similarity of their direction and uses. The splenii muscles of the head and neck, the longlssimus dorsi, the sacro-lumbalis, the tra- chelo-mastoideus, the spinalis dorsi, and the complexus, are here especially distinct on the dorsal region of the column, and important in its backward movements. On the lower part of the column is the large quadratics lumborum, and two muscles analogous to the psoas and the iliacus, which power- fully assist in the downward movements of the coccygeal vertebrae. The oblique, the transverse, and the recti mus- cles of the abdomen are lengthened and feeble on the long trunk of the cetacea, and the abdominal ring is wanting, as in other mammalia, where the testes remain permanently in the abdominal cavity. The proximate muscles of the an- terior extremities, the subscapular, the infra-spinati, the pec- toral and the deltoid muscles, are those principally employed in the movements of these fin-like organs. The more distant muscles of these extremities, however, especially the flexors of the fore-arm and hand, are much more developed in the herbivorous cetacea, which are able to seize and to climb upon rocks. The muscles of the pharynx, of the os hyoides, and of the exterior nares, are numerous and distinct in these animals, and correspond with the magnitude and the mobi- lity of these parts. The compressor muscles, embracing the expanded nostrils of many of the blowing cetacea, enable them forcibly to expel columns of water taken in by the mouth, and the extension of these muscular cavities allows them to breathe freely while the rest of their body is beneath the surface of the water. The cetacea, like fishes, amphibia, and serpents, consisting almost solely of the trunk, are moved and supported by its muscles in the dense element they inhabit ; but the land quadrupeds require strong mem- bers and strong muscular apparatus to support and move their heavy trunk in the light and unresisting element they breathe. In the herbivorous quadrupeds, the muscular energy and development are generally less than in the car- nivorous species, which corresponds with the inferior deve- lopment of their respiratory and nervous systems, and the diminished activity of all their functions. The ruminantia, like the pachyderma, having no clavicles, the humeri are ap- proximated under the thorax, and the anterior part of the trunk is suspended between the long vertical scapulae by the strong serrati muscles, as by a band passing across beneath the chest. From the weight and the horizontal position of the trunk, the extensor muscles of the extremities are more developed than the flexors, and to render these extremities more light and nimble, the distal bones and tendons are lengthened, and the heavy fleshy parts of the muscles, as in birds, have a high origin. The number, the divisions, and the tendons of these muscles, are fewer than in the more muscular and powerful carnivorous quadrupeds, from the reduced number of the toes. From the weight of the horns, and the use made of these defensive organs in many of the larger ruminantia, as the buffalo, the bull, the gnu, and the bison, the neck is short, and the muscles which support and move the heavy head are large and powerful, and the same is observed in many of the larger pachyderma, from the weight of the teeth, or tusks, or proboscis, or horns. From the great size and mobility of the exterior concha of the ear, in most of the herbivorous quadrupeds, they present a great development of the attollens aurem, and of the anterior and posterior auris, and from the lengthened form of their face and jaws, all the muscles of their lips and nostrils are gene- rally lengthened and strong. The muscles of the nose are particularly strong in the hog-tribe, to enable them to dig up their food with that organ of smell, as they are also in the long flexible nostrils of the tapirs. In the face of the elephant (Fig. 78,) so remarkable for the extent and flexibility of the nostrils, and for their sensibility and prehensile power, the levator and zygomatic muscles (a, s,) of the upper lip are in- corporated with those of the prolonged nostrils. These levator muscles of the heavy proboscis have a strong tendi- nous attachment laterally (s,) to the zygojnatic bone, and the anterior fasciculi (a,) are attached to the malar, the nasal and the frontal bones. The upper portion of the orbicular is oris (b,) is extended on each side along the base of the proboscis. Below the levator muscles (s,) are seen the large branches of the trifacial nerve proceeding forwards to the muscles of the face and proboscis. Extending downwards and backwards from the angle of the mouth, are several terminal fasciculi of the platisma myoides or panniculus carnosus (c, d, q,) and be- hind the ramus of the jaw is the large parotid gland, with its duct passing forwards beneath the facial nerve. Above the parotid is the attrahens aurem (o,) passing forwards to the malar bone, and behind the outer margin of the ex- panded orbicularis palpebrartim (a,) is the opening of the short duct from the temporal gland. Beneath this gland descends the powerful temporal muscle (k,) above which are the detached portions of the large att aliens aurem, (m, n,) destined to move in different directions the great expanded concha of this animal. Detached muscular fasciculi (h, i,) descend from the frontal to raise the skin in the region of the eye-brows. The depressor labii inferioris (r,) is seen extend- ing downwards from the margin of the lip, and the levator anguli oris rising obliquely upwards and outwards from the angle of the mouth. The panniculus carnosus, which is scarcely perceptible over the trunk in the larger thick-skinned pachyderma, is a strong, fleshy, subcutaneous layer in the softer skinned ruminantia, where it extends from the trunk over the neck to the head, and is attached both to the hu- merus and to the femur. In the mammalia, covered with spines, as the echidna, hedge-hog, porcupine, and in those covered with imbricated scales, as the manis and the arma- dillo, this muscle is also important in erecting or moving these epidermic organs, and in coiling or uncoiling the body. The neck is generally short, thick, and muscular in these ant- eaters, or loricated insectivorous quadrupeds, to assist in exca- vating the ground with their head in quest of food. In the ro- dentia, as in birds, the pterygoid and the temporal muscles are strong, and the pteryoid processes of the sphenoid bone have a corresponding magnitude; their masseter muscle is also of great breadth, and by sending its fibres both forwards and back-- wards from the depressed zygomatic arch, it assists in the longitudinal movement of the lower jaw in both these direc- tions. The whiteness, or pale colour, and the velocity of movement of the muscles of rodent quadrupeds, present further affinities to the class of birds, especially to the heavy inactive vegetable-eating gallinaceous kinds, where the blood is less rapidly and less extensively distributed through their muscular system than in the more powerful rapaceous tribes. The flexor muscles of the arms are generally much deve- loped and much exerted in this order of quadrupeds, either for scraping the ground for food, or for burrowing in the earth, or for climbing upon trees and cliffs. In the marsupial quadrupeds, the abdominal pouch is em- braced externally by the panniculus carnosus, the fibres of which serve, by their extension over the pouch to the sym- phisis pubis, to contract that cavity so as closely to embrace the newly-received young, and to protect them during the first period of their extra-uterine life. Within this pouch are the mammary glands, which are embraced by distinct muscular fasciculi destined to compress them and to aid the escape of their secretion, and other delicate fasciculi force the milk from the ducts and the nipples into the mouth of these abortive foetuses, and thus to extend the nipples from their ordinary retracted condition. The muscular system of carnivorous quadrupeds corresponds, in its high develop- ment with the solid texture of their bones, and the great extent of their respiration, the nutritious character of their food, and the living habits and wants of the species. By the magnitude and the extension forwards of the zygomatic arch their large temporal and masseter muscles have an ad- vanced insertion on the lower jaw, most favourable to their action, which is aided by the short truncated or rounded form of the head, especially in the feline animals. The leva- tor muscles of the lips and nose serve, by their magnitude, to uncover the large tusks, to prevent injury of the lips in seizing the prey, and to add ferocity to the aspect to in- timidate and overcome that prey. The muscles of their short and thick neck are strong, to enable them to carry off their prey entire, or to tear it to pieces, as those of their shoulder and arm are powerful, to enable them to grasp or hold down their prey, or to strike it to the ground, and they assist in bending forwards the trunk in striking, by their large recti abdominis, which here extend forwards to the anterior end of the sternum. The great extent of the fleshy part of their diaphragm aids their rapid and extensive respiration. The central tendinous portion of the diaphragm is much more ex- tensive, and consequently the muscular part less, in the ru- minating and other herbivorous quadrupeds. The muscles of the lower jaw in the cheiroptera and the levators of the upper lip are generally strong, as in the carnivora, and most of them are nocturnal predaceous animals, but as they pursue their prey through the air, the muscles proceeding from their scapula, their clavicle, and their sternum, to the humerus are of great size and strength, and the flexors of their carpus and fingers send down very long and thin tendons to the lengthened phalanges of the fingers, so as to lighten the dis- tal extremities of the hands, and to adapt them for progres- sion through so rare a medium. The quadrumanous animals being organized for a semi-erect position, and climbing move- ments, have the flexor muscles strongly developed on all their extremities, and the lengthened form and feebleness of the extensors of their posterior extremities, as the glutei muscles, the recti femor is ^ the vasti, the gastrocnemii, and other extensors, so large in the human body, produce that smallness of the nates, the thighs, and the calfs, so charac- teristic of this climbing frugivorous order. The muscles of the jaws and of the neck are strongest in the baboons, where the trunk is most adapted for the horizontal posture, and the ferocity and general strength are almost those of carnivora. The flexors of the coccygeal vertebrae are most powerful in the long prehensile tail of the aides, or spider- monkeys of America, in which the long recti abdominis are still destitute of tendinous intersections, as in many of the inferior mammalia. From the vertical position of the human trunk on the posterior extremities, and the freedom and flexibility of the arms the extensor muscles are most deve- loped on the legs, and the flexors on the arms. The muscles also which support and move the spine, and those which embrace the visceral cavities, are proportionally strong in man, (Fig. 79.) The numerous flexors of the toes are here powerful, to enable the foot to sustain the weight of the whole body in progression, and this organ is strengthened by its shortness, and by the fixed condition of its solid parts. The gastrocnemii, (79. B. k, I,) are large, and the tendo achilles, (79. B. m,) is thick and strong, to raise the heel and the whole trunk in walking, and to preserve the tibia in a vertical position on the astragalus in standing. For the same reason the rectus femoris (79. A. n,) and the vastus exturnus (J9. A. nf) and interims (79. A. w,f) are large and fleshy, to preserve the femur erect upon the tibia, and the glutei muscles (79. B. /,) are of great magnitude, to preserve the pelvis and trunk vertical upon the femur. Hence the magnitude and rotun- dity of the calfs, the thighs, and the nates, so characteristic of the human form. The trapezius (79. B. ,) the latissimus dorsi (79. B. c,) the rhomboidei, serrati, sacro-lumbalis, multi- fidus spin&y and most of the muscles of the back or extensors of the spine are proportioned to the great weight which they have to sustain in the movements of the trunk. The flexor muscles of the ankle-joint, and those of the knee and of the thigh are generally thin, lengthened, and feeble, compared with the extensors of these joints, or when compared with their development in many of the inferior mammalia. The obliqui and the transversalis abdominis, here form strong muscular parietes for the support of the heavy abdominal viscera, the recti abdominis, are unusually short and thick in man, and divided by distinct, transverse, tendinous intersec- tions, and the small pyramidales are more constant than in quadrupeds. The articulation -of the head of the humerus is adapted for free and varied, rather than for powerful, move- ments, and the pectorales (79. A. b,) the deltoid (79. A. e.) and the scapular muscles, are short, broad, and of moderate strength,, but the biceps brachii (79. A..f 9 ) the flexor carpi radialis (79. A. ,) and ulnaris, the supinator radii longus (79. A. h } ) the pronator radii teres (79, A. i,) and almost all the other flexors of the fore-arm and those of the fingers, are much more developed than the extensors of the same joint ; so that while these extremities are unfit for supporting the trunk in a horizontal position, they have the form and movements best adapted for seizing or feeling outward ob- jects, for manipulating the young, and for the various uses to which they are applied in social intercourse and in the arts. The great weight of the head, and its vertical position, unsupported by a ligamentum nuchee, require the recti and obliqui capitis, the splenius, complexus, and trachelo-mastoi- deuSy the platisma myoides (79. A. c,) the sterno-cleido-mas- toideuSy and nearly all the other muscles of the neck, to be proportionally strong for the support and movement of that heavy part. The teeth having little resistance to overcome, by the general softness of the food, the temporal and mas- seter muscles are of moderate size, and by the shortness of the jaws the ordinary muscles of the face are confined to a smaller extent of surface than in other mammalia, and their actions consequently produce impressions more numerous and diversified, and which are more visible from the nakedness, the softness, and the generally light colour of the human skin. The moveable parts of the face into which the muscles are chiefly inserted, are the lips and the eye-Brows, from the re- lation of these parts to food, to speech, and to visual impres- sions ; and as the motions of those parts are regulated by present sensations, and are associated with corresponding conditions of the mind, they are the chief seats of human expression, in which we read the transient feelings of the moment, or the habitual tendency of the passions, or the in- ward workings of the soul. CHAPTER FOURTH. NERVOUS SYSTEM, OR ORGANS OF SENSIBILITY AND MOTILITY. FIRST SECTION. General Observations on the Nervous System. THE nervous system communicates to the muscles their energy of action, and to all the sentient parts of the body their power of feeling. By the rapidity of its action, and its extensive distribution through the body, it establishes an in- stantaneous communication between the most distant parts. It is chiefly by this system that animals are connected with surrounding nature, and there is no part of their economy which is more indicative than this of the condition of the whole organization, or of the grade which an animal occupies in the scale. The nervous system has been detected in every division of the animal kingdom, and almost in every class, and it is everywhere connected with sensation and motion. Its general form corresponds with that of the body, being short and disposed in a circular manner in the short round bodies of most of the radiated and molluscous animals, and having a narrow and extended form in the more lengthened trunks of the articulated animals, and the vertebrata. The great cen- tral portion of the nervous system is perforated by the ali- mentary canal in the invertebrated classes, either in its mid- dle, as in the radiata and the mollusca, or at its anterior ex- tremity, as in the articulata ; but in the vertebrata the spi- no-cerebral axis lies wholly above the digestive cavity, by which it is nowhere pierced. The nerves of sensation and motion closely accompany each other, forming, by their union, chords or columns, or a spino-cerebral axis ; but the sympathetic nerves, appropriated to the more slow and re- gular movements of organic life, form a more isolated sys- tem, and these three systems are developed together, almost from the lowest animals. The nervous system consists of very fine tubular filaments, generally containing white- coloured opaque particles, much smaller than the globules of the blood ; these minute fibres do not ramify like blood- vessels, but continue uninterrupted from their peripheral ex- tremity in the textures of the organs, to their proximal end in the cineritious substance of ganglia, or of the brain. The cineritious, or cortical matter is composed of a vascular plexus, in the meshes of which is an irregular granular pulp, and the fibrous arrangement becomes more obvious and regular at its junction with the white medullary portion. In the white portion of the brain, and in the nerves of the prin- cipal senses the ultimate component tubular filaments have a knotted or beaded appearance, from their numerous small dilations, and they appear to be empty, or to contain only a transparent homogenous fluid, as seen in the annexed figure of Ehrenberg (Fig. 80,) where (a) is a magnified view of the knotted fibres composing the white matter of the hu- man brain, (b) represents the coarser beaded fibres composing the human auditory nerve, and (c) exhibits those of the hu- man optic nerve. This structure is observed on pressing fine sections of these parts between plates of mica or of glass, and viewing them through the microscope. This knotted structure of the minute filaments is seen also in the olfactory nerve, and in the sympathetic. The ordinary sym- metrical nerves of sensation and of motion, throughout the body, are composed of tubular filaments of more equal calibre throughout their course, and which are filled with minute white globular particles, as seen in those of the hu- man facial nerve (Fig. 80. d } ) where the globular minute par- ticles filling the neurilematous tubes are seen escaping from the cut ends of the filaments. This knotted appearance of the cerebral and sensitive filaments has been considered by some as resulting from the external aggregation of clusters of minute particles along the surface of chains of similar globules composing the ultimate nervous fibrils. These ex- tremely minute fibrils, variously aggregated together by en- veloping sheaths of condensed cellular tissue, but without anywhere anastomosing, constitute the nerves of sensation and of motion throughout the animal kingdom, and the spino-cerebral axis of the vertebrata. The nervous system is developed, like other organs of the body, from the periphery to the centre, and it presents great uniformity of plan in its adult conditions in the inferior classes, and in its transient embryo-forms throughout all the higher orders of animals. Nervous System of the Cyclo-Neurose, or Radiated Classes. Many of the poly gastric animalcules, as the cercarite, are distinctly sensitive to light, and organs of vision, in form of minute red points, are seen in almost every genus. They appear also to possess an acute sense of taste, they distin- guish, pursue, and seize their prey, they avoid impinging on each other while swimming, crowded in myriads, in a drop of water; they contract and bend their body in every direction, and they increase or retard, or cease at pleasure, their progressive motion and the vibration of their cilia, like the muscular and gangliated rotiferous animalcules, yet nervous filaments have not been distinctly detected in the minute transparent bodies of the polygastrica. The numerous straight parallel jaws, seen in many of the genera, are opened and closed, advanced and retracted, with great quickness and precision, and all the movements of these minute animals appear to be as regular, methodical, spontaneous, and well-directed as those of many higher animals with obvious nerves. The transparency of the nervous filaments in all the minute forms of animals probably prevents our detecting in the polygastrica the rudi- ment of that form of the nervous system which is seen in the wheel-animalcules, and in the higher articulated classes. In the poriphera, the component particles of the nervous and muscular systems are probably diffused through every part of the soft cellular tissue of the body, which possesses the same living properties in every part, and is almost inde- finitely divisible without destroying its vitality. The repro- ductive gemmules of these animals vibrate their cilia with great regularity and force ; they appear to be conscious of each other's approach, and can accelerate, retard, or cease their motions at pleasure ; they are sensitive to light, and appear to be guided by its influence in selecting the place of attachment most suited for the growth of each species : yet they exhibit no nervous or muscular filament in the gela- tinous texture of their body. Many polypipherous animals, even of the simplest forms, are obviously sensitive to light, as hydra, lobularite, actiniae, and muscular fibres are distinctly perceptible in the polypi and other parts of most of the higher genera. The nervous system has been long known in the actinia, which is a large isolated naked polypus, closely resembling, in external form and internal structure, the po- lypi of caryophillice, pavonite, and many of the larger litho- phytes. Nervous filaments surround the muscular foot of the actinia, beneath the stomach, and present minute gan- glia in their course, from which nerves pass out to the cir- cumference, and to the muscular folds which here possess great power of contraction. The same system probably ex- ists in many other closely allied forms of polypi. The lowest ciliograde acalepha possess great activity, are provided with numerous long tentacula exquisitely sensitive and contractile, exhibit distinct internal organs for digestion, circulation, and generation, and are found to be provided with nervous fila- ments and even ganglia around the oesophagus. In the beroe pileus (Fig. 81. A,) the nervous system is disposed around the mouth, at the lower extremity of the body, in form of a double filament (a,) with eight small white ganglia (b,) inter- posed between the eight longitudinal bands of cilia. From each of these gang- lia a small filament proceeds upwards in a longitudinal direction (c,) towards the anal extremity of the body, and others pass out laterally and downwards to the projecting irritable lips surround- ing the mouth. In the medusos a ner- vous band, accompanying the marginal circular continuation of the alimentary cavity, is disposed around the irritable border of the mantle, with minute gan- glia placed near the bases of the marginal tentacula. From each of these ganglia nervous filaments proceed to the near- est tentacula, along the bases of which they can be traced. Eight optic ganglia are perceived at the bases of the eight ocular peduncles, from which nerves proceed to the small red coloured marginal eyes, which they are observed to en- ter. Other ganglia are also perceived, near the ovaries, around the entrance to the stomach, from which nervous filaments, are seen passing downwards to the central groups of tentacula. From each optic ganglion two nerves proceed, which unite by a kind of decussation before they enter the eye ; the eye is provided with a distinct crystalline lens, and the pigment is red-coloured, like that of most of the simplest forms of this organ. From the active movements of most acalepha in swimming through the sea, from their gregareous habits, the exquisite sensibility and contractility of their ten- tacula, the distinct development of their muscular fibres, and their perception of light, it is not likely that many are desti- tute of some form of this system, so general in its occurrence and so influential in the economy. The echinoderma, like the acalepha, are all inhabitants of the sea, and, as in other aquatic animals, they present a de- velopment of the muscular and nervous systems, and of all the other organs of relation, inferior to that of animals of a corresponding grade, inhabiting the land ; their nervous fila- ments are also less white and opaque, less firm in texture, and less obvious than in the land animals. , The distribution of the nervous system has been long known in several ge- nera of this class, and it presents the same circular disposi- tion as in the acalepha and other cyclo-neurose animals. In the asterias (Fig. 81. B,) which has but one opening of the alimentary cavity (e,) there is a small white opaque nervous chord (,) passing round the mouth. From this circular chord a nerve (c, c,) is given off to each of the radiating di- visions of the body, which passes along the middle of the lower parietes between the ambulacra, and gives filaments to the muscular suckers and other parts of the rays. Mi- nute ganglia (b,) are observed at the points where these ra- diating nerves originate, and from each of these ganglia two nerves (d,) extend obliquely upwards along the sides of the stomach, and are confined in their distribution chiefly to the parts contained within the central disk of the body. A similar nervous chord is seen around the oesophagus of the echinus, which sends delicate white filaments to the compli- cated muscular and sensitive apparatus of the mouth ; other nerves are seen extending upwards from the same oesophageal ring, along the course of the vessels in the interior of the ab- dominal cavity. In the holothuria, where the axis of the body is greatly lengthened, and the animal reclines and moves on one side of the trunk, like the higher classes, where the calcareous shell is wanting, and the muscular sys- tem is most distinct and powerful, the nervous system is extensively distributed, and begins to manifest an approach to the helminthoid type. Interior to the osseous apparatus of the mouth is a white nervous ring around the oesophagus, from which nerves pass outwards to the large ramified ten- tacula around the mouth, and others extend upwards along the course of the eight strong longitudinal muscular bands. Fine white filaments are likewise seen passing inwards to the stomach and alimentary apparatus. In the siponculus, which is closely allied to the holothuria in internal structure and living habits, but is much more lengthened and vermiform in out- ward shape, two of the minute longitudinal nervous filaments extending backwards from the cesophageal ring are developed only on one side of the body, like the abdominal nerves in the helminthoid articulata. Thus, in all the typical forms of this extensive class the nervous columns of motion and sen- sation are seen to form a collar around the entrance of the alimentary canal, which corresponds with the inverted posi- tion of the mouth, and the expanded, globular, or radiated form of the body around a short vertical axis. The length- ening of the axis in the soft naked apodal vermiform species of echinoderma necessitates a horizontal position of the trunk, and the nerves, yet unprotected by an osseous sheath, are, for safety, continued only along the inferior surface of the body. This introduces the distinction of dorsal and ventral surface of the trunk, unknown in the inferior tribes of radiata, where the parts are equally developed around a central axis, and where the nervous system presents the same peripheral development. THIRD SECTION. Nervous System of the Diplo-Neurose or Articulated Classes. In the long cylindrical trunks of the helminthoid and en- tomoid classes, the nervous system partakes of the same lengthened form, and its motor and sensitive columns are ex- tended for protection along the ventral or under surface of the body. This system is still contained in the same rings or segments which envelop the other viscera of the trunk in all the vermiform articulata, where the articulated members are scarcely developed from the sides ; but in the highest entomoid animals of this great division the nervous columns are inclosed in a distinct thoracic osseous canal, separate from that which contains the other organs. And in all these classes the motor and sensitive columns appear to me to occupy the same inverted position, with relation to the spino-cerebral axis of vertebrata, as that first shown by Lyonet in insects ; the motor columns always lie above and in contact with the gan- glionic, as shown by him in the cossus (Fig. 84. A. b, c.) All the other viscera of the trunk present the same inverted po- sition ; the heart-forming portion of the sanguiferous system occupies the dorsal surface, and the great nervous columns, the ventral surface of the alimentary canal, in the articulated classes. The position of these organs and of the whole trunk, and consequently the nervous columns, is reversed in the spini- cerebrata, where the great centres of the nervous system are inclosed in a distinct osseous sheath. In the lowest of the helminthoid classes, the entozoa, where the animals remain, for the most part, permanently im- bedded in the source of their nutrition, the nervous system is very imperfectly developed, and is little required. The more elevated forms of nematoid intestinal worms, as the ascaris, (Fig. 82. A,) present a slender double, white, nervous filament, occupying the median line of the abdomen, and placed immediately within the inner longitudinal muscular tunic. This abdominal nervous chord in the long cylindrical body of the nematoid worms appears, from the close approx- imation and the smallness of its component parts, to consist of a single filament, but it unravels its compound structure chiefly in two places of its course where it meets with the vulva of the female, and separates its columns to embrace that orifice (Fig. 82. A. #,) and where it separates at. the an- terior extremity of the trunk to encompass the resophagus (Fig. 82. A. a.) These nervous columns are more obvious on the large strongyli and echinorhynchi, where they present a similar form and distribution. Their anterior extremities generally ascend on each side of the resophagus, so as to em- brace that canal more or less completely with a nervous collar. The surface of the body, along which the nervous columns run in these animals, and in all the other articu- lated classes, is termed the ventral surface, from its being the inferior in the ordinary position of the body, and from the anus and other excretory orifices opening on that aspect of the trunk ; the anus, the valva, and the penis are placed on this surface in the entozoa. This simple form of the ner- vous system presented by the lowest articulated class, re- sembles the embryo form of this system in the higher classes of this division, and corresponds remarkably with the first perceptible form of the spino-cerebral axis in ah 1 the verte- brated animals, where it appears a double white streak on the outer layer of the germinal portion of the cicatricula. These simple worms, consisting solely of the trunk, present also the embryo-form of the whole body of the highest articulated classes. In the higher animals of this class, the epizoa, which adhere to some part of the external surface of aquatic animals, as in the achtheres and many others, the nervous system is more developed, and these animals generally possess rudimentary antennae, and even eyes ; they have the two longitudinal nervous chords running separately and at some distance from each other, separated by the whole breadth of the alimentary canal. From the want of organs of sense on the anterior extremity of the body in most of the entozoa, the nervous system is very imperfectly deve- loped in that direction, and although it often forms a ring around the ossophagus, it seldom forms a perceptible supra- cesophageal ganglion where these filaments meet. In the rotiferous animals, where there is a complex mus- cular apparatus at the anterior extremity of the trunk, for the motion of the numerous large cilia, and another muscular apparatus for the movements of the strong lateral maxillae, the nervous system is most developed in that part of the body. There is generally in these wheel-animalcules, as in the hydatina (Fig. 82. B,) a distinct supra-oesophageal gan- glion (a,) with smaller lateral ganglia (b, c 9 ) surrounding the entrance of the alimentary canal (e) ; and from the anterior or inferior ganglia (c, c,) proceed the nervous columns back- wards along the ventral surface of the trunk (d.) These ab- dominal nervous columns, as in the entozoa, are sometimes approximated to each other, and without perceptible ganglia in their course, and in others they are separated to a greater or less distance from each other, and have numerous ganglia developed along their sensitive columns. In the hydatina, the longitudinal nervous columns are united (82. B. d 9 ) and without apparent ganglia below the alimentary canal. In the diglena lacustris the nervous columns are a little separated from each other, and present only one pair of ganglia imme- diately below the oesophagus, and another pair below the pyloric extremity of the stomach. The longitudinal ventral columns are much more separated from each other, in their whole course, in the notommata clavulata, and each of these lateral chords presents nine perceptible ganglia, in its course backwards to the posterior extremity of the trunk. These abdominal ganglia are symmetrically disposed in pairs, though removed laterally to a distance from each other on the inferior part of the trunk. The nervous system of the cirrhopods (Fig. 82. C,) is symmetrically disposed in approximated columns (b, c 9 ) along the abdominal surface of the trunk, with parallel pairs of ganglia regularly developed along their course, as in all the higher articulated classes. In the anitifa (Fig. 82. C,) we perceive a slender white nervous ring surrounding the oesophagus (a,) and sending out small filaments to the neigh- bouring parts, but scarcely forming a perceptible supra- ossophageal ganglion, from the imperfect development of the sensitive and masticating apparatus in these fixed and in- verted testaceous or entomostracous animals. As the long, jointed and ciliated feet, with their thick muscular haunches, and supporting the branchiee at their base, are developed from the sides of the posterior part of the trunk, the ganglia, like the nervous columns which connect them, are large in that part of the body, and correspond in position with the origin of the several pairs of legs (b, c, d, e, /.) So that these animals, notwithstanding their molluscous exterior, fixed in a multivalve shell lined by a fleshy mantle, are con- nected with the articulated classes by the diplo-neurose cha- racter of their nervous system, and by all their other organs of relation. The annelida present as great diversities in the extent of development of their nervous system, as in their exterior forms and their whole internal organization. In the minute transparent bodies of the planaria, and in many of the simplest forms of aquatic worms, scarcely a trace of nervous columns can be perceived, although their organs of vision are often numerous and obvious, and even in the naids and some of the nereids the nervous chord along the middle of the ven- tral surface of the trunk appears as uniform and simple, as in the nematoid entozoa. The columns in the simpler anne- lides, as in the first larva state of the higher entomoid classes, scarcely present ganglionic enlargements in their course along the abdomen, or supra-cesophageal ganglia at their anterior extremity, from the general inferiority of their organization, and from the still imperfect development of their lateral appendices for progressive motion, and of their cephalic appendices for sensation or mastication. In the long cylindrical and muscular bodies of the air-breathing earth-worms (Fig. 82. D,) with their myriad of short and highly moveable segments, their exquisitely sensitive skin, and their minute rudimentary feet, we can perceive innumer- able mixed nerves (Fig. 82. D. b, ,) proceeding laterally from the closely approximated nervous columns, but scarcely a ganglionic enlargement is developed in their long and equal course along the ventral surface of the trunk. In this highest of the helminthoid classes the nervous columns are still entirely enclosed in the cyclo-vertebral elements along with all the other viscera of the abdominal cavity. The abdominal chords of the earth-worm embrace the oesophagus at their anterior extremity, and form two distinct cephalic or supra-aesophageal ganglia (Fig. 82. D. a,) which supply nerves to the large muscular apparatus of the mouth, and to the long dorsal sympathetic. These two cephalic ganglia lie in contact with each other, are lengthened transversely, like those of insects, appear grey-coloured on the surface, and more white internally, and seem to be composed of minute globules when examined under the microscope. The sympathetics are distinct along the aorta in the nereides, and the globular par- ticles are seen in their neurilema. The ventral columns are separate from each other in the sabelke. Where the body of the annelides is much developed transversely, as in the leech, the sea-mouse, the pectinaria, and many others, the ganglia along the columns, and the columns themselves are much more developed and distinct, and are visible at a much earlier period in the embryo. The abdominal ganglia of the leech, as shown by Weber, are quite obvious in the embryo of that worm while it is yet in the ovum. Where the setae for progressive motion are large, numerous, and moved by strong extensor and retractor muscles, as in the pleione and many of the tubicolous anne- lides, the nervous columns and their ganglia are also large and distinct. The motor and sensitive nerves come generally from the same parts of the columns. The distribution of the minutest filaments are seen without dissection through the transparent and colourless body of the common pectinaria, and in most annelides the abdominal columns and ganglia, of a white colour and firm consistence, are obvious to the naked eye through the thin parietes beneath them. In some of the broad naked apodal annelides, where the segments of the body are very numerous and short, to facilitate their ser- pentine movements, as in the leech, the abdominal ganglia could not be safely accommodated in every ring of the trunk, and we find but one ganglion, of considerable size, for every three or four segments. These abdominal ganglia, about twen- ty-five in the leech, are more closely approximated to each other at the two ends of the nervous columns than in the middle, which already indicates the commencement of that longitudinal concentration of the ganglia so remarkable in the higher articulata, as the almost constant approximation of the lateral columns themselves on the median plain of the abdomen indicates development in a transverse direction, and a higher grade of this system than the detached condition of the columns seen in the lowest helminthoid animals. The nervous system of the entomoid classes presents only a more developed condition of the same plan of structure presented by this system in the worms, and that of the most elevated insect or crab begins its development with the simplest helminthoid form, as the nervous system of man passes through the simplest grades of that system presented by the lowest fishes. The larva of the insect, like the red- blooded worm, is almost a simple cylinder, soft, flexible, smooth, and equal throughout, and the nervous columns then manifest the same equal development from one extre- tremity of the body to the other. The most helminthoid adult form of the whole body presented by the entomoid classes is that of the long equally developed myriapods, and the simplicity of their outward form is accompanied with a corresponding inferiority in the type of their nervous system, and of all their internal organs. Their nervous system is nearly that of the annelida and the larva ; but as their con- solidated segments develop stronger muscular members to support them on the land, their nervous columns and gan- glia are encreased in size, to afford additional nerves to those enlarged extremities. On looking through the abdominal nervous columns of the scolopendra, we can distinctly per- ceive, notwithstanding the transverse approximation of all the parts, a distinct transparent line marking the original sepa- ration of most of the united ganglia. The globular cineritious particles, composing the ganglia, appear often united to form a round isolated mass in the centre of the ganglia, and the same opaque particles, when coagulated, are seen to occupy, in an interrupted manner, the interior of the sensitive columns. The motor columns I have found here of great size, as those shown by Treviranus and by Muller in the equally muscular body of the scorpion. The ganglia, like the segments, are nearly equally developed, and equidistant from one extremity of the chord to the other, excepting the first pair or supra-cesophageal, which give nerves to the long antennae and to the large eyes, and the remarkably small round terminal ganglion below the anus. The intermediate trans- verse motor nerves, pointed out as respiratory nerves by Lyonet in the columns of insects, and by Morren in the annelides, do not here come off, as they do in the earth-worm, midway be- tween the ganglia, but very close behind the ganglionic nerves. Four great nervous trunks originate from the columns on each side at each ganglion, and the second anterior of these branches, which is the largest, proceeds to the muscles of the legs, where I have traced it as far as the tarsal joint. Only two branches on each side proceed from the ganglionic space of the columns in the earth-worm, and one branch from each side in the middle of the inter-ganglionic space. The sympa- thetic and its ganglia are here extremely minute, as in the anne- lides from the lengthened, straight, and narrow form of all the nutritive organs. The second ganglion, or first sub-eesophageal pair, has a very lengthened form, and its nerves proceed back- wards at a very acute angle, to escape from the large and long cephalic segment of the scolopendra. The nerves from the ganglia I have observed more yellow and opaque than the trans- parent and colourless filaments from the motor columns, as if some of the cineritious globules of the ganglia were continued into the sensitive portions of the mixed nerves. The great toughness and density of the neurilema, which envelopes the nerves of the myriapods and insects which breathe atmospheric air, is seen by the stiffness with which the most delicate and lengthened filaments project right out- wards in a radiating manner from around all the ganglia ; the nervous filaments are much softer in the Crustacea, mollusca, and other aquatic animals, and the same difference is ob- served in the density of their muscular fibres. From the great size of the motor columns in the scolopendra, there is a distinct lateral longitudinal groove of separation between them and the inferior or sensitive chords, and on seizing the fourth or last pair of nerves from each ganglionic space, and raising them upwards, the large motor columns I have found to be nearly as easily separable from the sensitive beneath them, as those which I have demonstrated, for many years past, as the motor columns of the scorpion (Fig. 84. B. a, G,) and which have more recently been imagined to be res- piratory nerves in the muscular tail of that pulmonated animal. The abdominal nervous columns of insects have been cor- rectly regarded by Lyonet, Straus, Dufour, Chiaje, and most others, as analogous to the spino-cerebral axis of vertebrata, and the first of these writers has described them seventy years ago, as similar in anatomical structure and physiological proper- ties to the spinal chord of the highest animals. There are gene- rally at first thirteen pairs of approximated ganglia correspond- ing with the original segments,and extended along the middle of the ventral surface of the body, as shown by Lyonet in the caterpillar of the cossus, and the oesophagus pas'ses downwards to perforate the connecting nervous columns, between the first and second pairs of ganglia, as in other articulated clas- ses ; so that the first pair only are supra-oesophageal or ce- phalic, and all the succeeding ganglia of the columns are be- neath the alimentary canal. Those ganglia are at first, like those of the worm and the centiped, nearly at equal distances and of equal size, as the segments themselves of the young caterpillar. The columns and the ganglia originally separate on the two sides, early approximate transversely and unite, and a slow movement of the ganglionic matter is at length observed in a longitudinal direction to the parts of the columns where it is most required in the adult condition of the spe- cies. These transverse and longitudinal movements of the nervous matter so accurately described by HEROLD in the spinal columns of insects, proceed to a very variable extent, according to the degree of metamorphosis from the larva state to which the whole body is subjected in the different adult forms of this class. As in the myriapods, the first and second pairs of ganglia are here contained within the head, and the succeeding pairs are generally placed near the ante- rior limit of the segments to which they belong. The osso- phageal ring thus formed by the columns between the two first or anterior pairs of ganglia is much wider during the voracious larva state of the insects than in their adult con- dition, (see Fig. 83. A, B, C.) The third pair of ganglia, placed in the prothorax, appear to be generally smaller than the fourth, and the fifth, in the metathorax, smaller than the sixth, as in the cossus. The ganglia contained in the abdo- men of the entomoid classes, like the segments of that part of the trunk, are generally the least altered by develop- ment, from their primitive condition ; but these are most changed in insects, and are often obliterated by the process of development, as shown by Straus in the coleopterous in- sects, (see Fig. 83. D,) and by Dufour in many of the hemip- tera. The last pair of ganglia are generally the first to ad- vance forward to unite with the penultimate pair in the larva state. In the annexed figures (Fig. 83. A, B, C,) are seen the common conditions of the nervous system in the larva, the pupa, and the imago state, and the changes produced in that system by the metamorphosis to the perfect state, as observed and .described by Herold, twenty years ago, in the papilio brassicas. In the larva of that lepidopterous insect (Fig. 83. A,) the columns are lengthened, the ganglia widely separated, and nearly equal, with a large ring between the ce- phalic (1,) and the first infra-oesophageal (2,) ganglia. The first or cephalic ganglia (A. 1,) were observed by Lyonet to give off eight pairs of nerves, which pass chiefly to the organs of the senses, besides the two columns which connect them with the second pair of ganglia (A. 2.) They give off, like- wise,, filaments to the small lateral ganglia (A. b,) of the head, and to the commencement of the sympathetic series of ganglia (A. ,) as shown by Lyonet in the cossus. Between all the succeeding pairs of ganglia a solitary branch is seen coming off from each side of the motor column, which inter- ganglionic nerves were shown bv Lyonet to be distributed on the muscles and the minutest ramifications of tracheae for respiration. These inter-ganglionic nerves come off ge- nerally at a greater distance from the ganglia in insects and Crustacea, and in worms, than in the myriapods and the arachnida. The last pair (A. 13,) of ganglia are already ap- proached to those which precede them (A. 12.) In the pupa state of this moth (Fig. 83. B,) the approximation of the segments has not only shortened the total length of the co- lumns, but has caused them to assume a puckered or curved appearance, where they lie free between the ganglia ; the shortening of the whole trunk during the metamorphosis thus obviously takes place more quickly than the correspond- ing changes of the nervous system. The oesophageal ring is diminished, the cephalic ganglia are enlarging and extend- ing transversely for the myriad of developing eyes, and the thoracic pairs of ganglia are approaching to each other, pre- paratory to their uniting together at the part best suited to send nerves to the yet undeveloped thoracic members. The third pair of ganglia often advance to unite closely with the second pair, the fifth to unite with the fourth pair, and the seventh pair to unite with the sixth, during the passage to the imago state, and several, or the whole, of the ganglia which succeed these in the cavity of the abdomen, entirely disappear, while the motor and sensitive nerves still con- tinue to come off from the same parts of the columns, as seen in the nerves of the perfect insect (Fig. 83. C. 7, 8.) In the imago, or perfect state of the insect, (Fig. 83. C,) the loose inter-ganglionic portions of the columns, which were zig-zag in the pupa, have assumed a straight and shorter form, the two last pairs (12, 13,) have coalesced into one ganglion, and advanced from their original position, the cine- ritious matter has disappeared from two pairs of the abdo- minal ganglia (7, 8,) without affecting the original origins of their nerves ; four pairs of ganglia (6, 5, 4, 3,) have coalesced at two points of the thorax, to supply nerves to the muscles of the legs and wings ; the second and first pairs of ganglia (2, 1,) have approached in the head, and diminished the dia- meter of the oesophageal ring, the cephalic ganglia (C. 1,) have enlarged and extended transversely, to form the ex- panded optic lobe in each orbit, and the accessary nerves j(C. b, b,) and the great sympathetic (C. a,) running back- ward? in the median plain above the alimentary canal, have assumed an encreased development, as shown by Lyonet and Straus, and thus more intimately united all the seg- ments and parts of the body by encreasing these bonds of connexion between all the organs and functions of vegetative or organic life. The same kind of change in the whole condition of the nervous system, effected by the metamor- phosis of the insect, is seen in Straus' figure of the adult or imago state of that system in themelolontha vulgaris (Fig. 83. D,) where the usual concentration of the nervous matter in the head and thorax has proceeded to a greater extent than in the papilio. The ganglia of the abdomen are most fre- quently preserved through all the stages of life in the lepid- opterous and the hymenopterous insects, and in those which have the segments of the abdomen the least altered from their larva condition by the process of metamorphosis. But in this coleopterous insect (Fig. 83. D,) where the adult form of the whole body is very remote from that of a caterpillar or of an annelide, all the ganglia have disappeared from the short round abdomen, and have accumulated in three con- tiguous masses in the middle of the thorax, from which the nerves radiate to the organs of motion, and extend back- wards into all the segments of the abdomen. The cephalic ganglia (1, 2,) have also encreased above and below the oeso- phagus, the cerebral lobes (1,) passing laterally into the large compound eyes, and the great sympathetic longitudinal series of supra-cesophageal ganglia (,) with their accessary lateral filaments and ganglia (b } ) have advanced still more in their development. The greatest change of the nervous system, however, from its original larva condition, effected by the metamorphosis in insects, is that presented by the pentatoma, the cicada, and some others where all the ganglia of the columns have accumulated in two points, above and below the oesophagus, in the head and in the middle of the thorax ; thus nearly approaching to the highest condi- tion presented by this symmetrical nervous system in the most elevated tribes of Crustacea, and to the cyclo-gangliated character so general in the molluscous classes. Although during this rapid series of changes the last and the penulti- mate pairs of ganglia are generally the earliest to ap- proach and unite, they are at first distinct pairs like those before them on the columns, as seen in the annexed figure by Lyonet, of the three last pairs of ganglia and of the nerves which come from them, in the larva of the cossus ligniperda (Fig. 84. A.) The upper portion (a,) of the columns is seen to give off the inter-ganglionic nerves (d, c,) which Lyonet showed to be distributed on the respiratory organs after receiving a small connecting branch from the first pair of the next succeeding ganglionic or mixed nerves (11. c } c.) This arrangement of the motor and ganglionic nerves is represented at each inter-ganglionic space along the columns. It was likewise shown by Lyonet that these motor nerves (13. 6,) proceeding to the lateral muscles and respiratory or- gans, come from a tract occupying always the upper surface of the columns, and distinctly passing over the upper surface of at least the last pair of ganglia. It was, however, in the class arachnida that Treviranus first pointed out, more than twenty years ago, in the ner- vous system of the scorpion (Fig. 84. B,) the continuity of this motor tract (84. B. , a,) over the upper surface of the whole extent of the columns, and I have long shown the same structure to pervade the articulated classes. The ner- vous system, like most other parts of the arachnida, pre- sents an intermediate condition of development betwixt that of most insects and that of the higher Crustacea. While the nervous columns of the scorpions, with their accompanying series of ganglia, are lengthened in form, like those of lepi- dopterous insects, the same parts in the spiders have the concentrated form which they present in the highest crabs, with their symmetrical ganglia concentrated in two points of the body. The motor columns are large in the scorpion, as in the scolopendra, and are here also easily separated from the sensitive columns beneath them, excepting where they pass over the surface of the ganglia, from which they cannot be detached. The whole of the columns are less intimately connected together, and the inter-ganglionic spaces are larger in the cavity of the abdomen than in the round narrow muscular tail, or caudal portion of the trunk. In this pos- terior part of the body the motor columns are proportion- ally more flat and more expanded over the ganglionic chords, as they are likewise in Crustacea and other articulated classes. Besides the cephalic, or supra-cesophageal ganglia (Fig. 84. B. 1,) and the large infra-oesophageal mass of con- centrated ganglia which radiates nerves to the five pairs of legs, there are seven pairs of closely approximated ganglia (84. B. 3 9,) of a lengthened form, disposed along the in- ferior surface of the trunk. The motor or respiratory nerves come off at the ganglia, as in the myriapods, and not at a distance from the ganglia, as the inter-ganglionic nerves of insects and Crustacea. Towards the caudal extre- mity of the scorpion, the mixed nerves of the columns di- verge suddenly in numerous minute fasciculi from the sides of the ganglionic spaces (<84. B. g. 8.) But as we advance in the trunk we find the whole of the mixed nerves coming off in one large fasciculus from each side of each double ganglion (84. B. 5, 4, 3.) The first and second pairs of ganglia (84. B. 1, 2.) form a large, white, soft nervous mass occupy- ing the anterior and lower part of the trunk, immediately be- neath the eyes ; this lobed mass is perforated obliquely by a small aperture through which the oesophagus passes to the stomach. I have generally found the ganglionic spaces of the columns of the scorpion, as in many insects, closely en- crusted with small white lobes of adipose substance, in which the oesophageal nervous collar is likewise imbedded. The in- fra-oesophageal ganglia are much larger than the first pair which have few and small parts to supply. This second pair of gan- glia, composed of all the ganglia of the extremities (84. B. 2,) is protected behind by a cartilaginous arch, through which the columns pass to the third pair of ganglia, like the consolidated internal arch for the nervous column in the thorax of Crustacea. Numerous large nervous branches proceed backwards along the inferior surface of the abdominal cavity from the infra-oesopha- geal ganglia (84. B. 2,) beneath the motor and sensitive co- lumns, as represented, many years ago, by Treviranus and Muller, in their views of these columns in the scorpion. In the short and rounded body of the spiders, the supra- and infra-ossophageal ganglia form a large nervous collar around the oesophagus, the inferior portion of which, as in the scor- pions, forms a large lobed mass, from which all the nerves of the extremities radiate. The supra-ossophageal ganglia are small here also, from the imperfect development of the or- gans of the senses and of mastication. The ganglia of the abdomen, which are extended along the trunk separately in the scorpions, are accumulated into a single mass in the spiders, and placed near the anterior part of their short and wide abdominal cavity. Thus the extent of concentration of the nervous columns of arachnida, and the extent of dis- tribution of their unsymmetrical or sympathetic system, cor- respond with the high condition of the other systems in this class, and while they vary in the different tribes, they ap- proximate the more elevated forms to the highest insects and Crustacea. In the numerous and diversified class of Crustacea we meet with every condition of the nervous system, from that of the lowest annelide, or the earliest larva state, where scarcely a filament is yet perceptible in the place of the nervous columns, to that concentration of the nervous ganglia around the oeso- phagus, which connects the highest articulata with the mol- luscous classes. The motor and sensitive columns are seen on a larger scale in the Crustacea, and they occupy the same relative position as those long known in the other entomoid classes. The supra-cesophageal ganglia are generally larger than those of arachnida, and smaller than those of insects ; they are, for the most part, united into a single cerebral ganglion de- voted chiefly to the large organs of the senses, and their nerves unite with the sympathetic, as in insects and mollusca. The ner- vous ring of the oesophagus is here very wide, but the columns are small which form it, and they give offlarge branches to the stomach and the sympathetic while they pass along the sides of the oesophagus. The ganglia of the cephalo-thorax vary much in their number, their magnitude, and their degree of approximation according to the form of that part of the trunk, and the size of the several pairs of legs. The motor columns are seen in the large macrourous decapods, as in the post abdomen of the lobster, (Fig. 85. a,) passing over the upper sur- face of the sensitive columns (#,) and their ganglia (c,) as a broad, thin, white, fibrous layer, and giving off lateral branches chiefly behind each pair of ganglia. The largest trunks and mixed or moto-sensitive nerves of the columns come off at their ganglionic spaces (c, d.} These inter-ganglionic motor nerves (e, e,) in the posterior portion of the trunk come off at a great- er distance behind the ganglia, as they do in insects ; but as we advance to the fore part of the body, their origins be- come approximated to the ganglia. The posterior terminal pair of ganglia have generally a high position, and are of great size where the caudal appendices of the trunk are much developed, as in the long-tailed decapods. The same transverse and longitudinal approximation of the nervous columns and their ganglia,seen in the inferior articulata, is perceived in the development of the Crustacea ; and the most concentrated form of the nervous system met with in the highest brachyourous decapods, gra- dually acquires this concentration of all its ganglia in two points of the body, above and below the oesophagus (Fig. 86. D,) by passing through all the inferior conditions which pre- sent themselves as permanent or adult forms in this class. Many of the lower amphipoda and isopoda have the segments nearly equally developed from the anterior to the posterior extremity of the trunk, and this equal development is seen also in the nervous columns and ganglia of these segments, as shewn in the annexed figure of those of the talitrus locust a, or common sand-hopper (Fig. 86. A.) The slender longitudi- nal columns and the minute ganglia along their course here remain distinctly separated from each other by a small space on the median plain ; the ganglia are nearly of the same size from the first pair (1,) above the oesophagus (a,) to the caudal pair (11,) and the pairs are almost equidistant along the whole trunk, in a longitudinal direction. This simplest adult form of the nervous system shown by Audouin and Edwards in the talitrus, has been pointed out likewise by Rathke in the idotea, and the same is seen through the trans- parent bodies of many other minute isopods. The same form of the nervous columns is seen in the highest Crustacea while yet in their embryo condition in the ovum. In the short and broad trunk of the cymothoa where the legs are still equally developed along the whole sides of the body, the nervous columns (Fig. 86. B,) have already approximated to touch each other on the median plain, and the ganglia on the two sides have coalesced to form a single chain along the middle of the abdominal surface of the body. The ganglia are still nearly equidistant, and equally developed along the columns ; but where the minute posterior tapering segments of this animal have advanced and united, their ganglionic matter appears likewise to have been carried forwards to en- large the ninth or terminal ganglion (Fig. 86. B.) The transverse concentration of the columns and ganglia towards the median plain, thus seen in the lowest Crustacea, is suc- ceeded in higher species by a longitudinal movement of the nervous matter directed, as we have seen in inferior classes of articulata chiefly to two points of the body, the head and the thorax, from which the largest and most important ap- pendices of the body, whether for sensation, mastication, or progressive motion are developed. In the long-tailed deca- pods, as the lobster (Fig. 86. C,) and the cray-fish, not only is the sympathetic system of nerves derived from the lateral ganglia of the stomach, greatly developed, as shown nearly twenty years since by Succow, and the ganglia and columns have coalesced and met transversely along the whole body ; but in the region of the thorax, from which the five pairs of large extremities are developed, the ganglia (Fig. 86. C. a. 6,) have both enlarged in size above those of the post-abdomen (C. 6 12,) and considerably approximated to each other in a longitudinal direction. In the higher enh tomoid articulata the segments first coalesce on the anterior and posterior portions of the trunk, and hence the enlarged form presented by their cephalic and caudal ganglia, indepen- dent of the great size often attained by the appendices deve- loped from the terminal parts of the body. The ganglia and columns of the post-abdomen in these macrourous decapods (C. 6. 12,) as shown by Succow, retain much of their primi- tive simple form, like the segments and appendices of that portion of the trunk; but the last ganglion (C. 12,) advanced to the penultimate segment, is here of great size, from the magnitude of the swimming appendices developed from the two caudal segments. The thoracic ganglia and columns are excluded from the general cavity of the trunk, and are en- closed in a distinct canal with solid calcified parietes prolong- ed inwards from the exterior shell. The most concentrated form of the nervous system met with in the Crustacea and its highest condition presented by this articulated division of the animal kingdom is that found in the short and broad trunks of the brachyourous decapods (Fig. 86. D,) where all the symmetrical ganglia of the columns are generally col- lected into two masses, the one in the head, and the other in the centre of the cephalo-thorax, and where the mo- tor and sensitive columns are almost confined to a nervous band around the wide oesophagus. The anterior of these, or the supra-cesophageal ganglion (86. D. 1,) is comparatively small in the brachyourous decapods, from the smalmess of the cephalic appendices, which it supplies with nerves. The infra-cesophageal nervous mass (86. D. 2,) is of great size, consisting of the whole chain of ganglia, which was originally extended along the body behind the oesophagus, and is favourably situated between the haunches of the legs, under a strong internal osseous arch, in the centre of the trunk. It sends out numerous branches to the surrounding viscera, and to the five pairs of legs which radiate from around that point, and the columns are prolonged backwards ramifying along the short slender post-abdomen, as a simple nervous chord. There are many intermediate conditions of these nervous columns and ganglia between those of the asta- cus (Fig. 86. C,) and of the maia (Fig. 86. D,) some of the macrourous decapods having the thoracic ganglia much more approximated than in the former, and many of the bra- chyourous species having them less concentrated into a mass than in the latter, and similar links are observed to connect together the typical forms of this system in the other orders of Crustacea, and throughout all the articulated classes. Thus the most elevated form of the nervous axis met with in this division of the animal kingdom begins its development with two simple abdominal filaments, like the lowest hel- minthoid form of entozoa, and by a gradual process of con- centration proceeding transversely and longitudinally from the peripheral to the central parts, it arrives at the cyclo-gan- gliated character of the molluscous classes, with its great symmetrical ganglia confined to the resophageal ring. Nervous System of the Cyclo-gangliated or Molluscous Classes. The nervous system is distinctly developed and pro- vided with several ganglionic centres, in all the molluscous classes from the lowest compound forms of tunicata to the highest of the cephalopods, and notwithstanding the remarkable diversity of form which the animals of this division present, we can trace a certain similarity of cha- racter and unity of plan in the development of this system, and in its typical forms, throughout all the cyclo-gangliated classes. As all molluscous animals are aquatic, excepting a few of the gasteropods, their nervous fibres present the same soft and pellucid character observed in other aquatic invertebrata, which often renders it less easy to trace their ramifications and to detect their plan of distribution, than to follow the denser opaque fibres of the air-breathing tribes, and has repeatedly caused them to be mistaken for sanguiferous or chyliferous vessels. In the short and broad trunks of the animals of this division, as in the round bodies of the radiata, the nervous system is characterised by a tendency to accumulate around the entrance to the alimentary canal, but from the high position of the molluscous classes in the scale, their nervous oesophageal collar is provided with distinct and often numerous ganglia. The same co- lumnar arrangement of the great nervous centres, which I have long observed and described in most of the articulated classes, I have found to exist also in the molluscous, though in a less extended or recti-lineal form. In the tunicated and conchiferous animals the columns are chiefly disposed beneath the alimentary canal; in the gasteropods and the pteropods they are more equally distributed around the entrance to the stomach; and in the more elevated forms of cephalopods they at length mount to that supra-cesophageal position which they preserve in all the vertebrata where they cease to embrace the alimentary canal. In the lowest compound tunicated animals as in the botryllus and the pyrosoma, there is a small round white coloured opaque ganglion, within the muscular tunic of each of the com- ponent animals, placed near the entrance of the respiratory sac, and between that orifice and the anal. When we com- pare the position of the tho- racic cavity (Fig. 87- /.) andits apertures (a. b.) in the tuni- cata with those of the conch- ifera, we perceive that this single median ganglion (e,) is situate on the ventral side of the body, though at some distance from the entrance (g.) to the stomach, (h.) This ganglion is seen in the same position in the minute com- ponent animals of the poly- clinum, the aplidium, the di- demnum, the euccelium, the synoicum, the diazona, and the distoma. In the larger forms of simple ascidia as in the boltenia, phallusia, and cynthia (Fig. 87,) this last ganglion (e.) has generally a more lengthened oval form, and I have sometimes found it bifid both before and behind, where two nervous branches come off from each of its extremities. The two anterior nervous branches are larger than the two posterior which pass backwards on each side of the anal opening (b.) of the muscular tunic. The anterior pair encompasses the respiratory orifice (a), sending off filaments to the fringed and highly sensitive tentacula (c.) which guard this thoracic aperture ; these two branches again meet behind the orifice (d.) and continue as a broad chord along the dorsal part of the muscular coat or mantle. Besides this ganglion, which is connected with the muscular apparatus of the respiratory sac and its openings, like the posterior pair of ganglia in the conchifera which are also sometimes united into one, three other ganglia are observed in the abdominal cavity, ex- tended, as the ganglionic columns in the succeeding class, between the alimentary and respiratory cavities. The nervous columns of the conchifera are almost con- fined to a sub-oesophageal position, and extend along the inferior or ventral surface of the abdominal cavity, above the respiratory sac; they are most detached from each other at their anterior part, and often continue separate through their whole course. The motor or simple co- lums, which I have generally found more transpa- rent and colourless than the ganglionic, keep in contact with the sensitive chords, but sometimes they occupy a lateral position, passing over the sides of the ganglia, especially the last pair where the two kinds of nerves are most obvious. On opening the respiratory sac of a conch- iferous animal, as of the common muscle, mytilus edulis (Fig. 8S) and throwing aside the branchiae, the foot, and the pectinated lateral prolongations of the lips, we perceive two large white ganglia (88. a.b.) placed on the lower and lateral parts of the mouth, resting on the peritoneal covering of the stomach or of the liver which envelopes it, and sending upwards and forwards numerous large branches to the lips and neighbouring parts, and to the sympathetics. Two of these branches, after encompassing the short oesopha- gus, often meet above that passage, and form a distinct supra-cesophageal or cerebral ganglion, and two other branches passing inwards from the same ganglia, beneath the stomach, sometimes form another double ganglion on the median plain, close to the first sub-oesophageal pair (88. a.b.) The double nervous columns continue their course back- wards, from these anterior lateral ganglia, running on the same plain along the interior surface of the abdominal cavity, to the broad expanded base of the muscular foot, where the middle pair of ganglia are placed. These ab- dominal or pedal ganglia (88. c. d.) , are the most variable in size, and correspond in their development with the presence or the magnitude of the foot which receives branches from them. The columns which connect these two pairs of ganglia are separated from each other on the median plain by a space, which varies according to the lateral extension of the trunk in the different species ; they are generally parallel and near to each other in their course. The two symmetrical columns of ganglionic and simple nerves, continuing backwards beneath the ovary to the inferior surface of the great adductor muscle of the valves, meet with a third pair of infra-abdominal ganglia (88. e.) which are the most approximated to each other, and are often united into a single lobed ganglionic mass, as in the pecten maximus. In this large pecten it is easy to perceive that the motor portion of each of the two converging columns passes laterally over the surface of this large compound ganglion placed on the median plain, under the middle of the large adductor muscle of the valves. This pair of ganglia (e) appears to vary in size with the magnitude of the adductor muscle, and the extent of the palleal margins and branchke which receive nervous branches from it. The columns which pass backwards from the posterior ganglia, soon divide into numerous branches which supply this part of the trunk, and the largest nerves (/.), continued upwards along the adductor muscle from the columns, are observed to extend, on each side of the rectum, to the margins of the mantle, and to supply the ciliated and fringed orifices of the abdominal and thoracic cavities, and they send large branches to the branchiae. The ganglia, which are most obvious on first opening the valves of the conchifera, are the posterior pair placed on the adductor muscle, and these have generally bi'CMi described and figured by Poli as the centre of this system, which he mistook for the chyliferous system of these animals; the same pair has been uniformly designated and represented by Chiaje as the brain of these acephalous niollusca ; but both these authors have accurately represented their forms and the distribution of their numerous diverging branches. These two ganglia are connected by a trans- verse band on the posterior adductor muscle of the broad area noa, the nerves of which have been minutely traced and represented by Poll, as extending over the branchiae and the posterior portion of the mantle. These posterior ganglia, situate on the great adductor muscle, and sending forwards branches to the gills, are very remote from each other in the avicula; they are separate in the mactra as in the mytiluSy they are partially joined into a quadrilobate mass in the cardium and the solen, they form a single gan- glion in the spondylus as in the pecten, and they form by their union a transverse thick nervous band on the large abductor of the pinna. The first sub-cesophageal pair of ganglia (88 a. b.) with their numerous anterior branches and their two columns extending backwards to the pos- terior ganglia (88. e) have been accurately traced and re- presented by Poli in different species of solen. Small ganglia are observed in the conchifera, as in the tunicata and in the articulated classes, on other nerves besides the two great sensitive columns. The visceral or sympathetic nerves appear to receive their principal branches from the nerves of the first sub-cesophageal pair of ganglia, as they have been long known to receive their principal trunks from those of the two corresponding lateral ganglia of the stomach in the Crustacea. From the great development of the organs of the senses and of mastication at the entrance to the oesophagus in the gas- teropods, their nervous axis is much more concentrated and developed in that situation than it is in the conchifera ; and from this general advancement of the great nervous cen- tres to the head of these animals, we commonly observe a proportional diminution in the extent of their two symme- trical sub-ventral nervous columns. In the short and broad bodies of the gasteropods, the symmetrical columns are still generally separated from each other by a variable space along the median plain, as in the conchiferous mollusca, but as the general form and structure of the animals of this class vary remarkably, we find a corresponding diversity in the form and disposition of the great centres of nervous energy. In the simple form of the nervous system presented by the carinaria mediterranea (Fig. 89,) there is a close analogy with the ordinary disposition of the symmetrical detached nervous columns along the ventral surface of the abdomen in the inhabitants of bivalve shells. Lobed ganglia (g. h,) are observed in this animal at the sides of the oesophagus (*) and a transverse nervous band (,) connecting them, and encom- passing that passage. From this nervous oesophageal ring (?,) the two optic nerves pass laterally to the eyes (/,/,) and the tentacular branches pass upwards and forwards to the long slender tentacula (89. e, e.) Numerous branches ex- tend downwards and laterally, to ramify on the muscular parietes of the abdomen, and two principal trunks (k, k,) ex- tending backwards along the ventral surface of the abdomen, like the great nervous axis of conchifera, meet with a large compound quadrilobate ganglion (q,) behind the stomach (,) and above the diverging muscles of the compressed pinniform foot (n, o.} These two sub-ventral, detached and converging columns (k, k,) extending from the cesophageal collar to the middle or pedal ganglia (#,) can be traced backwards from these ganglia along the lower surface (q, m,) of the abdominal cavity and beneath the intestine (c, d } ) to near the caudal extremity of the trunk. Another branch is described by Chiaje as a sympathetic extending directly backwards from the brain, or cesophageal collar, and spreading on the viscera without passing to the quadrilobate ganglion (q.) Numerous branches come off from the periphery of the pedal ganglia (q,) to ramify on the muscles of the foot, and the surround- ing parts. The pedal ganglia (q,) have been regarded as sympathetic, but from their whole relations to the rest of the nervous system, and from the form and position of the great trunks (k, k, m,) connected with them, they appear more analogous to the symmetrical sub-ventral ganglia of conchifera, and of the articulated classes. The lateral ganglia of the nervous cesophageal collar are generally the parts from which the two principal nervous chords extend back- wards beneath the abdominal viscera in the gasteropods as in the bivalved mollusca, as seen in the annexed figure of 1 he nervous system of the aplysia fasciata (Fig. 90.) In the aplysia, as in many of the higher forms of gasteropods there is a large median supra-cesophageal ganglion (a,) from which the organs of the senses receive their nerves, and from this single superior ganglion (a,) proceed downwards and laterally two nervous bands to connect it with the usual pair of late- ral cesophageal ganglia (b, c.) Two nervous branches (/,) likewise proceed downwards and forwards from the" cerebral ganglion (,) to form a small anterior collar around the oeso- phagus (i 9 ) and an inferior single ganglion (ff 9 ) is seen be- neath the muscular bulb of the oesophagus, where these branches meet. The posterior large nervous collar is com- pleted by an inferior transverse band passing between the lateral ganglia (b, c,) and beneath the oesophagus (i.) From the lateral cesophageal ganglia (b, c,) two nervous trunks (d 9 d,) extend backwards beneath the divisions of the stomach (k, I, m, n 9 ) and along the ventral surface of the abdomen to near the bulb of the aorta (t 9 ) where they meet with a single gan- glion (e,) considered, from its position, its distribution and its attachment to that arterial trunk, as a sympathetic ganglion. The cerebral ganglion (#,) placed above the oesophagus, and connected through the lateral ganglia (b, c,) with these two longitudinal columns, has a quadrangular form, a reddish brown colour, and is enclosed in a tough cranial membranous capsule immediately above the posterior end of the bulb of the oesophagus. The same reddish coloured nucleus and granular structure are seen in all the ganglia of the aplysia, and from the toughness of the neurilematous covering of the ganglia and nerves they can be easily injected like vessels, as in most other molluscous animals. The lateral ganglia (90. b, c,} have each a trilobate form, and the nervous bands which connect them with the brain have a distinct appear- ance of separate component columns. There are two fila- ments which proceed backwards from these lateral ganglia, like the origins of the sympathetics of Crustacea, and which here form by their union an arch around the trunk of the aorta. The anterior bilobate sub-oesophageal ganglion (90. g 9 ) gives off eight nerves to the oesophagus, the salivary glands and the muscles of the mouth. The two lateral ganglia are con- nected together by a broad nervous band, which passes be- low the oesophagus and completes the posterior ring around that passage. The muscles of the head, the superior tenta- cula, and the small eyes, receive their nerves from the cere- bral ganglion (a.) The optic is a branch from the large ten- tacular nerve on each side. The nerves from the lateral ganglia are spread chiefly on the muscular parietes of the trunk, and those from the aortic ganglion (e 9 ) are observed ramifying on the liver, the intestines, the branchiae, and the generative organs. The aorta receives a minute branch from the two anastomosing filaments of the lateral ganglia, which embrace it, and a second ganglion almost impercepti- ble, is found on one of the branches proceeding from the great abdominal sympathetic ganglion. The sympathetic ganglia are also distinct in the scylltea, the glaucus, and many other small naked gasteropods. The nervous oesophageal ring of the haliotis has two lateral ganglia which supply nerves to the tentacula, the pedunculated eyes, and other parts of the head, and presents below the oesophagus a large median ganglion from which a series of long nerves extend backwards along the inferior surface of the abdomen, as in the carinaria, and the same plan of distribution is seen in the nervous system of the patella and many similar forms. In the bulla lignaria (Fig. 91,) there is a small lobed gan- glion anterior to the usual cephalic ring (e,) and which is si- tuate below the bulb (d 9 ) of the oesophagus (a,) behind the salivary glands (b, b 9 ) and anterior to the insertions of the diverging muscular bands (c 9 c,) of the bulb of the oesopha- gus. This ganglion is situate like the small anterior infra- cesophageal ganglion of the aplysia. The cephalic ring (e, e,) enveloping the oesophagus, behind this single ganglion, has two large trilobate ganglia (/, /,) at its sides, which send numerous branches to the surrounding muscular parts, and two long branches (A, A,) extend backwards from them along the sides of the abdomen to two symmetrical sub-ventral ganglia (i 9 i,) placed above the muscular foot. Behind these are two sympathetic ganglia (k, &,) which send filaments to the digestive organs, the ovary (o,) the oviduct (/?,) the uter- ine sac (q,) the vulva (m,) and the urinary organs (n.) Two anterior small sympathetic ganglia, which receive nerves from the lateral ganglia (f,f,) of the brain (e, e } ) are perceiv- ed in this animal near the cardiac orifice of the strong, dense muscular gizzard. So that, although the bulla is almost acephalous, it has attained a considerable development both of its symmetrical and sympathetic systems of nerves. Instead of a simple nervous band passing over the oesophagus to connect the lateral ganglia, as in the bulla, there are two pairs of gan- glia around that passage in the jantkina, and in the limnea ; the ganglia are approximated to form a collar around the oesophagus. In the doris, the testacella, and many others, these ganglia are confined to a supra-oesophageal position, extending as a broad lobed nervous mass across the upper part of that canal. In the chitons there is a broad supra- cesophageal band and two closely approximated lateral gan- glia below the oesophagus which send back large nerves to the foot and sympathetic filaments to the abdominal viscera. The vermetus has, like the aptysia, a small anterior infra- oesophageal ganglion besides the ordinary supra-oesophageal and two lateral ganglia ; the infra-oesophageal ganglion is situate beneath the muscular bulb of the oesophagus, and a small sympathetic ganglion, placed near the stomach, receives filaments from the lateral ganglia, and sends nerves to the abdominal viscera. In the long body of the dentalium the brain forms a single lengthened quadrilateral ganglion ex- tended longitudinally above the oesophagus, and sending down small nerves on each side to complete the cesophageal ring. In the pulmonated gasteropods the brain is generally more equally divided between the upper and lower surfaces of the cesophageal ring, the broad ganglia in these two situa- tions having a bilobate form. The highest forms of the pec- tinibranchiate gasteropods, as the buccinum and the harpa, have the greatest portion of the ganglionic matter of the ceso- phageal nervous ring accumulated in a cerebral position above the entrance of the alimentary canal, as seen in the annexed figure of the harpa elongata (Fig. 92,) from New Guinea, where the mantle (0,) is opened to show the branchiae (dy } ) and the syphon (c } ) on the left, and the mucous follicles the colon (n.) and the male organ (f.) on the right side of the respiratory cavity. On opening the an- terior part of the trunk the retracted proboscis (g) with its muscles (h.) are seen extending backwards over the brain (i.) which rests on the inferior turn of the oesophagus where the two salivary glands (k. k.) are also placed. From this cerebral mass (i.) large nerves are seen ex- tending forwards to the head (#,) the tentacula, with the eyes (s. s,) at their base, and to the broad fin-like ante- rior fold (a,) of this long tapering inoperculate foot. Other nervous chords extend downwards to the ventral surface of the abdomen, and backwards to the sympathetics which supply the abdominal viscera. This gradual concentration of the ganglionic matter of the great cesophageal nervous ring of the gasteropods into a cephalic position and form, on the median plain above the alimentary canal, is a pre- liminary to its enclosure in a distinct cranial covering, which takes place in the cephalopods. The nervous system of the pteropods presents the same general plan and the same varieties of form in its ce- phalic masses as seen in the gasteropods, especially in the naked and swimming species. In the clio bo- realis (Fig. 93, B.) one of the small naked swimming pteropods, there is a double nervous collar around the ossophagus, as in the aplysia and many other gasteropods. Two small ganglia approximated to each other to form a bilobate brain are placed above the oesophagus im- mediately behind the lips (93, B ,) and indicate by their diminutive size the imperfect development of the organs of the senses in this animal which scarcely presents a trace either of eyes or tentacula. Behind these central ganglia are two larger lateral ganglia connected together by a transverse band below the oesophagus, and which supply the principal nerves to the muscular closed mantle enveloping the trunk. Two nervous bands proceed from each of this middle pair of ganglia, one of which con- nects them with the cerebral, and another proceeding backwards connects them with a posterior pair of ganglia, which are united by a transverse chord above the oeso- phagus. The ganglionic portion of this cerebral ring, or perforated brain, is more developed below than above the oesophagus in the pneumodermon, where there is only a narrow transverse band above that passage, and three pairs of ganglia disposed symmetrically below. Four of these inferior ganglia are almost in contact on the me- dian plain, and two are more lateral and separate. But in the hyalea the nervous matter is chiefly concentrated into a large supra-oesophageal broad ganglion of a quadran- gular form, which gives off branches from its four angles. Two of these nerves passing round the oesophagus enter a double ganglion placed below that passage. The nearest approach to the vertebrated form of the nervous sytem is that presented by the cephalopods, the highest of the mollusca and of all the invertebrata. The oesophagus still perforates the brain, as in all the infe- rior classes, but the greatest portion of that organ and the symmetrical columns prolonged from it are here placed above the alimentary canal. The brain is enclosed in a distinct organized cranial cavity, numerous symmetrical ganglia are developed on the great nervous axis both before and behind that organ, and sympathetic ganglia are observed in the abdominal cavity. The supra-oeso- phageal portion of the brain in the nautilus forms a thick transversely-elongated band, imperfectly surrounded by the cranial cartilage, and enclosed in a tough mem- brane, as in many of the gasteropods. It is extended laterally into the small optic ganglia of this animal, and is connected laterally with an anterior and a posterior sub-oesophageal ganglionic ring, as in many of the inferior mollusca. Each of the sub-oesophageal bands exhibits two lateral ganglionic enlargements from which numerous branches are ramified forwards and backwards, and the two columns are prolonged backwards from the lateral parts of the brain to the palleal ganglia, as in other cephalopods. In the loligopsis (Fig. 93. A.) the brain is enlarged both above and below the oesophagus, and its superior portion, which forms an oval encephalic mass, is more completely surrounded with a cartilaginous cranium. From the lateral parts of this encephalic ring (,) come off the optic nerves, and the two large longitudinal sym- metrical columns (a. b. d.) which run parallel and near to each other along the dorsal surface of the abdominal ca- vity to the caudal extremity of the sac, having the pal- leal ganglia (b,) in their course. The cerebral ganglion of the octopus, (Fig. 93 C. ,) forms a more globular concentrated mass enclosed in a thick cartilaginous cranium, covered with a gelatinous cellular arachnoid and a dura mater giving off laterally optic nerves (C. b.) to very large optic ganglia (C.c) contained within the sclerotic coat of the eyes. The optic ganglia are sur- rounded with lobed masses of adipose substance (e. e.) and send out a large radiated pencil of detached optic fila- ments (d,) to penetrate the choroid. The brain is sepa- rated from the oesophagus (o,) and the aorta (n,) by the membranous floor of the cranium, the whole periphery of this perforated cerebral mass, encompassing the oesophagus, not being yet surrounded with the consolidated portion of the cranium. On each side of the cranium is a small vestibular cavity occupied by a sac on which the audi- tory nerve is distributed and containing a limpid fluid, and a calcareous concretion. In the sepia the brain is more distinctly bilobate, of a yellowish white colour, and pulpy consistence, smooth on the surface and contained in a thick cartilaginous cranium, which is perforated for the passage of nerves, and gives attachment externally to the muscles of the head and trunk. The cranium is continued round the oesophagus though soft on its interior part. Immediately anterior to the brain and the cranium is a large heart-shaped supra-cesophageal ganglion, of a yellowish colour, resting over the oesophagus, and sending forwards numerous large nerves to the labial ap- paratus enveloping the mandibles. On the lower part of the muscular bulb of the mouth, are two small lateral ganglia, which send in numerous large branches to the strong muscles of the mandibles. Both the labial and the mandibular ganglia are connected with the brain by distinct nervous chords. Below the ossophagus, and an- terior to the cranium, are two large lateral pedal ganglia, which send forwards large nervous trunks to pass ramify- ing through the tubular axis of all the feet. These two pedal ganglia are likewise connected by nervous chords with the sides of the brain. The two optic nerves pass through the cranium, from the superior or dorsal lobes of the brain, and enter two large crescentic optic ganglia within the sclerotic, as in other naked cephalopods. The two great longitudinal nervous columns are extended backwards from the sides of the brain, separate from each other, and along the dorsal aspect of the trunk, above the abdominal cavity to the large palleal ganglia which distribute radiating nervous chords chiefly to the interior muscular parts of the mantle. The inner portion of each of these two symmetrical columns (Fig. 93. A. b. d.) extending from the brain, along the dorsal region of the cephalopods, does not enter the palleal ganglion, but passing along the inner margin of that ganglion, it penetrates the substance of the mantle by a distinct foramen, and radiates into numerous rami- fying chords, which are distributed chiefly on the exterior parts of the trunk. The principal branches of these ex- terior palleal nerves extend backwards in the direction of the broad thin cartilaginous laminee which support the branchial muscles, and two filaments extend inwards to the abdominal sympathetic ganglia (93. A. e. e.) placed at the base of the branchiae, near the lateral hearts. By means of the two sub-cesophageal pedal ganglia anterior to the brain, a second nervous ring is formed around the oesopha- gus in the cephalopods, as in most of the gasteropods and pteropods. On opening the skull of the argonauta from be- hind, as in the annexed figure (Fig. 94,) by Chiaje, the brain (fl,) of a round form above, separated from the inner parietes of the skull by the gelatinous arachnoid, and extending downwards to encompass the oesophagus (i,) is observed to give off laterally the large optic nerves (^,) which perforate the cranium to reach the pedunculated eyes, and from its more anterior portion the separate great symmetrical columns (94. b, b,) which extend backwards to the palleal ganglia (94. c, c y ) on each side of the crop (,) the aorta (n, 0,) and the salivary glands (ra,) and above the branchiae, and the genital organs. By removing the anterior supra-cesophageal heart- shaped labial ganglion, and the O3sophagus, the great lateral sub-oesophageal pedal ganglia (/,) are perceived to send for- ward large nervous trunks (d, d, d, e, e,) which extend rami- fying through the central canal of each arm along with the blood-vessels. A separate nervous tract, like that seen in the dorsal columns of the cephalopods, is seen to pass back- wards along the sides of the supra-cesophageal ganglion of the buccinum and other gasteropoda, and having the same pellucid appearance as the simple ungangliated nerves of most invertebrata ; the same tract of simple nerves is seen in the symmetrical columns of conchiferous mollusca especially, as in the cephalopods, at the great posterior pair of symme- trical ganglia. The dorsal columns prolonged from the brain are more approximated, parallel, and lengthened in the loligop- sis and loligo than in most of the naked cephalopods, which corresponds with the lengthened and narrow form of the trunk in these animals. The great nervous trunks, (94. d, d, d,) proceeding from the inferior ganglia (f,fj) anterior to the brain, and accompanying the artery and vein (p,p,pj q,q,g,) through the axis of each arm, send out lateral ramifying branches at regular, short, and decreasing distances from both sides, corresponding with the position of the exterior suckers, and these nervous trunks, diminishing in size as they advance towards the apex of the arm, present through- out their whole course a beaded or knotted appearance, like the nervous axis of a worm. In the long cylindrical trunk of the loligo the nervous columns are continued from the two palleal ganglia, along the whole extent of the dorsal sur- face of the body, and send out numerous lateral branches to the caudal fins, which are seen radiating and ramifying to their extreme margins. As the great trunks of the sympa- thetic in the inverted bodies of the articulated animals occu- py the dorsal region of the abdominal cavity, and the sym- metrical columns the ventral, we find that in the cephalopods where the columns extend along the back; as in the higher classes of vertebrata, the branches of the great sympathetic proceeding from the inferior surface of the brain, extend along the ventral aspect of the abdomen, between the liver and the ink-gland to the bottom of that cavity, where they form a ganglion which sends nerves to the digestive, the circulating, and the respiratory organs. So that, although the brain of the cephalopods is still perforated by the oeso- phagus, as in all the inferior classes, we find all the principal parts of the nervous system of the vertebrata already deve- loped in this class, and after undergoing a series of changes of form and position in the inferior tribes of animals, regu- lated by the general development and form of the body, they have here acquired the form and situation which they pre- serve throughout all the higher classes to man. This system begins the development of its ganglionic axis in the lowest acephalous mollusca, as in the lowest helminthoid articulata, below the oesophagus, and extends along the ventral surface of the abdomen ; but in the higher gasteropods, as in the highest insects and Crustacea, we find it advanced in its position, ac- cumulated around the entrance of the digestive canal, and mounting to a dorsal position, which nearly the whole of the lengthened spino-cerebral axis has attained in the cepha- lopods. FIFTH SECTION. Nervous System of the Spini-cerebrated or Vertebrated Classes. The great axis of the nervous system occupies en- tirely a dorsal position in the vertebrated classes: it is enclosed in an osseous sheath, which is continued over its posterior prolongation, and it is no where perforated by the alimentary canal. The fibrous structure of the encephalic portion which is perceptible in the cephalo- pods, becomes more distinct and obvious as we ascend through the vertebrated classes; and that anterior part of the nervous axis becomes likewise proportionally larger, leaving only slight traces, in the fourth ventricle, of its original opening for the passage of the alimentary canal. The spinal chord, the medulla oblongata, the optic lobes, and the cerebral and cerebellic hemispheres,, form the most constant elements of this axis, but their relative and actual developments vary in the different classes. They are com- posed of minute neurilematous tubular filaments which form two posterior contiguous sensitive or ganglionic columns and two anterior motor columns, the filaments and nerves of which are not interrupted by ganglionic enlargements. Though much varied in the extent of its development in the different classes, there is great similarity in the successive stages of the development of this system in the embryos of all the verte- brated animals and great uniformity of plan in all its adult forms. Beginning with the two columns of the axis, like the two chords of a worm, it becomes reinforced by filaments from every part of the periphery, and gradually receives its ganglionic enlargements, as in all the inferior tribes, where they are most required by the developing organs of the body. The great sympathetic, or nervous system of organic life, which is extended along the upper or dorsal side of the symmetrical axis in the inverted bodies of the articulata is here developed along the ventral or under surface of the spino-cerebral axis, and like the sym- pathetic system of the highest entomoid classes it is en- closed with the viscera, in a cavity distinct from that which envelopes the nervous axis of animal life. In the long vermiform bodies of the lowest cyclo- stome fishes, as the lamprey, the pride, and the gastro- branchus, the two slender columns extended along the back and scarcely protected by a cartilaginous sheath, are nearly without cerebellum, and destitute of gangli- onic enlargements in their course to the head, where the minute cerebral elements are enclosed, like the ganglia of a cephalopod, in a cartilaginous tube, con- sisting of a single piece. This simple condition of the axis presented by the lowest fishes, resembles the pri- mitive embryo-state of this system in the highest ver- tebrata before the extremities begin to shoot from the sides of the trunk. In fishes, as in cephalopods, where a large exterior surface of the skull is required for muscular attachments, the minute brain does not fill the cavity of the cranium, and the space between the dvra mater which lines the skull and the pia mater which invests the cerebral organs is occupied by the soft transparent semifluid cellular tissue of the arach- noid coat which passes down likewise through the ver- tebral canal, enveloping the spinal chord. The spinal chord is nearly equal in its development throughout the vertebral column, even in many of the anguilliform osseous fishes, from the smallness of the arms and legs not requiring those enlargements which we observe in most higher animals, where the nerves of larger and more powerful extremities are given off. In species which have the arms of great magnitude, as rays and flying-fishes, there is a proportionate development of the upper enlargements of the spinal chord. The num- ber and the extent of these enlargements of the spinal chord in fishes corresponds with that of the members developed from the periphery of the trunk. In the trigla (Fig. 95. C,) where the pectoral fins are of great size, a series of ganglionic enlargements (95. C. b. ,) of the spinal chord (a) are observed at its upper part, which corresponds in number with the number of the large detached rays of the pectoral fins presented by the different species, trigla cuculus having five enlarge- ments and five detached rays, and the trigla lyra (95, C.) having six of each. The posterior extremity of the chord is sometimes sensibly enlarged where nerves pro- ceed to the muscles of a large caudal fin, and in abdo- minal fishes an enlargement is observed, corresponding with the ventral fins. In some fishes with a great de- velopment of the head and anterior portion of the trunk, as the frog-fish^ and the tetrodon, the spinal chord passes but a short way through the vertebral canal, and a long cauda equina extends backwards, as in the human body. The symmetrical nerves arise by double roots from the two grooves on each side of the spinal chord, the motor nerves which commence more towards the tail than the sensitive, originate from the anterior lateral groove, and the sensitive nerves, provided each with a ganglion be- yond the vertebral canal, originate from the posterior groove. These unite, as in the invertebrated classes, to form mixed, moto-sensitive nerves, they give sensibility and motility to the organs of animal life, and they send filaments to the sympathetics each vertebra being analo- gous to a segment of the trunk, and each pair of sym- metrical nerves originating from the brain of that segment. The nervous O3sophageal ring of the invertebrata is still perceptible in the wide opening between the lateral halves of the medulla oblongata of the lampreys. The great fasci- culi composing the cerebral masses the corpora py- ramidalia, olivaria and restiformia are already obvious in the large medulla oblongata of fishes ; but the crossing fasciculi of the corpora pyramidalia are slightly marked, they become apparent and numerous as we ascend through higher classes. The medulla oblongata, the apparent origin of most of the cranial nerves, is here large and lobed, and often nearly as broad as the cerebral organs before it in the cranium ; it is deeply marked above by a calamus scrip- torius, at the bottom of the fourth ventricle, which is situate between it and the single median lobe composing the cere- bellum. Anterior to the medulla oblongata and cerebellum, there are generally in osseous fishes three pairs of rounded lobes placed in front of each other along the floor of the cranium, and occupying but a small portion of that capacious cavity, as seen in the brain of the conger-eel, muraena conger (Fig. 95. A,) where these three pairs of lobes are nearly equally developed and similar in form. The posterior pair, (95. A. c,) immediately before the cerebellum (95. A. b,) are the optic lobes or corpora quadrigemina, which are hollow in- ternally, as in the human foetus, and give origin to the prin- cipal fibres of the optic nerves. The second or middle pair of lobes (95. A. e,) are the cerebral hemispheres, which are here, as in the human embryo, destitute of internal ventricles and without external convolutions. The anterior pair (95. A. /,) are the olfactory tubercles, which are entirely appro- priated to the olfactory nerves (95. A. g, a.) In the trigla lyra, (Fig. 95. C,) where the medulla oblongata (b, b,) is marked by ganglionic enlargements, and the cerebellum (d,) is proportionally small, the optic lobes (e, e,) are much larger than the cerebral hemispheres (/,) and the olfactory tuber- cles (g,} are much inferior in size. In the perch, (Fig. 95. B,) the medulla oblongata (a,) forms two broad lobes at its anterior termination (b } ) over which the elevated cerebellum (e,) arches backwards. The optic lobes (95. B. d, d,) have an elongated form, the cerebral hemispheres (e, e,) much smaller than the optic lobes, are extended vertically, and the olfactory tubercles (/,) form two slight spherical enlarge- ments at the commencement of the olfactory nerves (g, g.) In most fishes, as in the earliest condition of the human brain, the optic lobes are larger than the hemispheres 5 they are smooth and cineritious on the outer surface, and destitute of the transverse sulcus which gives them a quadrigeminous appearance in the adult mammalia ; they are hollow within and have their inner parietes lined with white medullary fibres. The ventricles of the optic lobes communicate freely with each other, and they open behind, by a narrow aquiduct, into the fourth ventricle beneath the cerebellum. The interior white medully parietes of these two lateral cavities meet above on the median line, and form an extended commissure like the corpus callosum of the hemispheres ; they descend along the median line to form a prominent ridge, but not a complete septum, between the ventricles. The optic lobes of fishes, like their medulla oblongata, are larger in proportion to the cerebral hemispheres than in any of the higher vertebrata, and they present the same great proportions the earlier we observe them in the human embryo. Their development corresponds generally with that of the corpora olivaria, the optic nerves, and the eyes, but is in the inverse ratio to that of the cerebral and cerebellic hemispheres. The inner medullary fibres of the optic lobes pass transversely and arch upwards over the contained ventricles, but the exterior fas- ciculi advance longitudinally to the optic nerves. The cine- ritious portion predominates in these and other parts of the brain, as in the human embryo ; and the wide canal extend- ing through the middle of the spinal chord of fishes corres- ponds also with the fretal condition of that part in mamma- lia. These optic lobes, the first formed portions of the brain anterior to the medulla oblongata, being analogous to the supra-cesophageal ganglia which give origin to the optic nerves in the invertebrata, are almost alone developed in the cyclostome fishes ; they are large compared with the cerebral hemispheres in most of the osseous fishes (95. C,) they are comparatively small in the anguilliform fishes (95. A,) their size is much reduced in the plagiostome chondropterygii (95. D. d,) and they become proportionally smaller as we ascend through the higher classes to man. They contain within their cavity one or two pairs of tubercles and the large cor- pora candicantia lie beneath them on the inferior surface of the brain. The anterior and posterior commissures are al- ready developed, and also a rudimentary fornix. Anterior to the hollow optic lobes of fishes are the proper cerebral hemispheres) (95 . A. e,) which are scarcely percep- tible in the cyclostome fishes, are very small in most of the osseous fishes, (95. B. e, e, C. e, e,) equal the optic lobes in the apodal fishes (95. A. e,) and have attained in the plagios- tome species (95. D. e, e,) a much greater size than these small optic lobes, (95. D, d.) In the osseous fishes, as in the embryo condition of the human hemispheres, they are destitute of internal ventricles^ smooth and cineritious on the surface, without external convolutions, and they are com- posed internally of radiating white fasciculi derived from the corpora pyramidalia. In the rays and sharks (95. D. e, e,) where the hemispheres attain a great size, they already pre- sejit inequalities on the surface, they begin to extend back- wards over the small optic lobes, (95. D. d,) and they already manifest distinct ventricles in their interior, which continue in almost all the higher animals to man. The cerebral or lateral ventricles are continuous with the canals of the olfac- tory nerves (95. D./,) as in all the higher classes. These cerebral lobes, perhaps the analogues of the thalamic optici, are developed in the direct ratio of the corpora pyramidalia and crura cerebri, and their increased development in higher animals corresponds also with the enlargement of the lateral lobes or hemispheres of the cerebellum. Before the cerebral hemispheres are placed the most an- terior pair of lobes, which here, as in higher classes, are ap- propriated to the olfactory nerves, and vary in their form, size, and situation more than any of the other parts of the brain. These olfactory tubercles are generally in the osseous fishes, (95. B./, C. p } ) in immediate contact with the cere- bral hemispheres, and inferior to them in size ; in the an- guilliform fishes (95. A. /,) they nearly equal the hemi- spheres (95. A. e } ) and in the plagiostome fishes (95. D. g,g,) they are placed on the course of the olfactory nerves at a greater or less distance from the hemispheres (95. D. e, e,) and present a great transverse development, exceeding in magnitude the hemispheres themselves. In these last fishes the rays and sharks, the large cineritious olfactory lobes are situated at the end of thick peduncles and lie immediately above the cribriform plate of the ethmoid which the olfac- tory nerves perforate to be distributed on the extensive pituitary membrane covering the laminae of the nose. The cerebellum forms only a minute transverse band on the median plain in the cyclostome fishes, where it can be perceived, and in the higher osseous fishes (95. B. c,) it still consists merely of a simple median lobe, smooth on the sur- face, destitute of lateral hemispheres, and analogous to the vermiform median lobe first developed in the cerebellum of the human embryo. It rises vertically in the osseous fishes (Fig. 96. ,) compressed between the optic lobes (96, d,) and the lobes of the medulla oblongata (96. b,) and generally ex- tends backwards, tongue-shaped, over the fourth ventricle, but is destitute of the laminated surface which it begins to present in the plagiostome fishes. This median portion of the cere- bellum, (95. D. e,) like the cerebral hemispheres, (e, e,) is greatly developed in the muscular rays and sharks, extending backwards over the medulla oblongata and forwards over the small optic lobes (95. D. d,) and already presents not only a transversely laminated structure, as in higher classes, but also small hemispheres extending laterally like tubercles from its base. Its magnitude here corresponds, as in higher classes, with that of the corpora restiformia, which are conspicuous in the plagiostome fishes, and it presents internally an ar- borescent appearance of white diverging fasciculi, arising from its laminated structure. All these lobes contained within the capacious cranium of fishes are covered with cineritious substance, and derive their internal white fibrous parts distinctly from the great fasciculi of the medulla oblongata, the corpora pyramidalia, olivaria, and restiformia. From the great size of the olfactory and the optic nerves in this class, as seen in the perch, (Fig. 96. ff, q,) and also of the fifth pair (96. m,) and from the small- ness of the three pairs of lobes from which these nerves ori- ginate, the cerebral hemispheres (e,) the optic lobes (d,) and the medulla oblongata (b,) appear only like small ganglia ap- propriated to these nerves. The olfactory tubercles (96./,) are generally contiguous to each other and to the hemi- spheres, and the white fibres of the olfactory nerves (96. g,) pass forwards on their lower surface from the cerebral lobes (96. e.) Two commissures are generally perceptible in the cerebral lobes, and beneath the small lobules in the optic lobes a third ventricle is seen leading downwards to the in- fundibulum and the large petuitary gland. The pineal gland (95. A. c?,) with its small peduncles, is seen between the optic lobes and the hemispheres, as in higher classes, and is composed chiefly of cineritious substance. From the great extent of the cranial cavity and the small- ness of the brain, the cerebral nerves have a long free course from their origin to their cranial foramina. In the osseous fishes the optic nerves (96. q,} generally cross each other with- out uniting or intermingling their fibres, but in the plagiostome fishes they unite and decussate, as in mammalia. Fromthegreat size of the organs of vision in this class, and of the muscles which move them, not only the optic nerves are proportion- ally large, but also the third, fourth and sixth pairs, or oculo- motory, trochlear and abducent nerves, which are the motor filaments of these muscles. The abducent nerves advance forwards from the inferior surface of the medulla oblongata, where they arise between the posterior fibres of the large trigemini. This large fifth pair (Fig. 96. m,) arising from the sides of the lobes of the medulla oblongata immediately beneath the cerebellum (96. c,) gives off the ophthalmic (96. p,) which passes forwards through the orbit above the eye to be distributed on the upper part of the face ; the supe- rior maxillary (96. o,) which passes under the eye to ramify on the sides of the face ; and the inferior maxillary (96. n,) which supplies chiefly the palate and lower jaw. The prin cipal branches of the seventh or facial nerve (96. I,) are dis- tributed on the posterior part of the face and neck. The great pneumo-gastric nerves (96. &,) arising behind the trige- mini, from the sides of the medulla oblongata present a large ganglion, from which branches pass downwards to the branchiae, and backwards along the oesophagus to the sto- mach, and air sac or rudimentary lungs ; and before these is a branch analagous to the glosso-pharyngeal, which supplies the tongue and anterior branchial arch. This great ganglion of the pneumo-gastric (96. k,) is sometimes close to the origin of the nerve, and sometimes remote ; and a branch from this nerve, like the accessary of Willis, extending lon- gitudinally on the side of the whole body near the lateral line sends filaments to the surface. The pneumo-gastric supplies nerves also to the electrical organs of the torpedo. The acoustic nerve, arising between the trigeminus and the great pneumo-gastric, descends to the vestibule and long semi-cir- cular canals. The spinal nerves, like those of the cranium, have gene- rally a long course before they pass out through the inter- vertebral foramina, and the ganglia of their posterior roots are often so small, especially in osseous fishes, as to be scarcely perceptible, and slight enlargements of the spinal chord can sometimes be distinguished at the origins of the several pairs of symmetrical nerves. The great sympathetic arising from cranial nerves as high as the trigeminus, is rein- forced in its course backwards by branches from the spinal nerves, and forms plexuses and ganglia, as in higher classes, before being distributed on the organs of the trunk ; it is more distinct in the plagiostome chondropterygii than in the osseous fishes, and is least developed in the cyclostome spe- cies. It forms small ganglia along the sides of the vertebral column, where it receives filaments from the spinal nerves, and its plexuses embrace the arterial trunks before ramifying on the digestive, respiratory, and generative organs. In the perennibranchiate amphibia, and in the larva state of those which lose the gills, the spinal chord, the medulla oblongata, and the cerebral parts contained within the cra- nium present the same proportions and general conditions which we observe as permanent characters in most of the osseous fishes ; but the cerebellum is generally smaller in amphibia and reptiles than in all the other vertebrata. As in the lower fishes, the spinal chord in these inferior forms of amphibia is prolonged, small and tapering, through the greater part of the coccygeal vertebrae, without distinct en- largements where the nerves usually come off to the arms and to the legs. The medulla oblongata is yet broad and lobed, the cerebellum in form of a very small median trans- verse lobe without hemispheres, the optic lobes large, cine- ritious, smooth without, hollow within, and quite exposed, and the cerebral hemispheres, extended longitudinally, smooth and cineritious externally, without internal ventricles, and smaller than the optic lobes. The metamorphosis of the caducibranchiate species changes the condition of their ner- vous system from that of the lower fishes to nearly that of the reptiles above them ; and these changes are effected so rapidly that we can perceive a marked advancement in the development of the nervous system of the tadpole produced in one day. In the tadpole of the common frog, on the fourth day, (Fig. 97. A.) the spinal chord is perceptibly en- larged at its posterior part (a,) and also the medulla oblon- gata. The cerebellum (b,) is scarcely visible, extended across the median plain ; the optic lobes (c,) and the cerebral he- mispheres (e,) are small, narrow, and so far separate longitu- dinally as to expose entirely the intervening optic thalami (d.) On the following or fifth day (Fig. 97. B,) besides the general encrease of the spinal chord (B. #,) the cerebellum (B. b^ is perceptibly enlarged, the optic lobes (B. e,) are proportionately broader and shorter, and the cerebral hemi- spheres (B. e,) encreased in every direction, begin to extend backwards over the optic thalami (B. d.) As the tadpole advances in its development, and the legs and arms are ex- tended from the sides, the posterior and middle enlargements of the spinal chord are proportionately encreased, the cere- bral hemispheres enlarge, and their white fibrous internal parts predominate over the cineritious covering, but they present no convolutions nor ventricles. By the rapid growth of the dorsal vertebrae, and the obliteration, anchylosis, and absorption of the coccygeal vertebrae, the spinal chord ap- pears to recede from behind forwards, within the vertebral canal and the cauda equina to lengthen. The anterior extre- mity of the chord is enlarged from the first, as it gives origin to most of the cranial nerves, and the posterior end is en- larged for the cauda equina, as is even perceptible in fishes and serpents. Here, as in other classes, where the spinal chord by the progress of development, is retracted within its osseous sheath, and the cauda equina is thus length- ened in the adult state, there is a greater distance ob- served between the origins and the places of junction of the motor and sensitive roots of the nerves which com- pose it, and consequently between the intevertebral ganglia and the spinal chord ; and this is most manifest at the pos- terior end of the column, which has been most influenced by the metamorphosis. The long narrow cerebral hemispheres of the adult frogs taper to the olfactory nerves which com- mence with cineritious tubercles, and the optic nerves are observed distinctly to cross each other before the optic tuber- cles. The changes effected in the nervous system by the metamorphosis of the higher amphibia closely resemble those produced by development in the human embryo. Their sympathetic nerves and ganglia are more distinct than in fishes. In the class of reptiles the small cavity of the cranium nearly corresponds with the dimensions of the enclosed brain, as in some fishes, and the superficial cineritious sub- stance still predominates over the internal white fibrous matter, though to a less extent than in fishes and amphibia. The cerebellum is remarkable for its proportionate smallness in this class, and the cerebral hemispheres, containing each a distinct ventricle, now always exceed the optic lobes. The spinal chord of serpents, from their want of arms and legs, is still destitute of enlargements, as in the apodal fishes, but the medulla oblongata is of considerable size, and the fourth ventricle, still uncovered by the small cerebellum, descends into the spinal chord. From the smallness of the brain and cranial cavity in the centre of the head of reptiles, the rela- tive size of these parts does not influence that of the whole head at different periods of life, and the head preserves the same proportions to the rest of the body through life also in amphibia and fishes. From the still imperfect development of the cerebral parts in this class, the vital functions of rep- tiles are less immediately dependent on them than in hot- blooded animals, and they longer survive their mutilation. In the saurian and chelonian reptiles the posterior and mid- dle enlargements are obvious on the spinal chord at the ori- gins of the nerves of the extremities. The wide medulla oblongata within the cranium is marked longitudinally by the limits of its three component fasciculi on each side, and the decussating bands of its corpora pyramidalia are more dis- tinct than in fishes. The nerves of the body bear a large proportion to the size of the cerebral centres, and corres- pond in their distribution to those of the higher air-breathing classes. The great ganglia and plexuses of the sympathetics now more closely accompany the arterial trunks, as we see to become more exclusively their distribution from the articu- lated and the moUuscous classes up to man. The twelve pairs of cranial nerves are seen here as in birds and mamma- lia, and they chiefly arise from the enlarged medulla oblon- gata, as seen in the annexed figures of the brain of the tor- toise, emys europaa, Fig. 97. C. D. Immediately before the anterior roots of the first cervical nerves (97- D. ,) are seen on the inferior surface of the medulla oblongata, the origins of the hypo-glossal, or twelfth pair of cranial nerves, and on the sides, the numerous branches of the spinal-accessory, or eleventh pair. Before these are seen on the sides, two por- tions of the pneumo-gastrics and the glosso-pharyngeal, or ninth pair. Close together are the acoustic and the facial nerves, and towards the median plain below are the sixth pair, or abducentes oculorum, (97- D. b.) The small motor es oculorum are seen anterior to these last, and on the sides the large trunk of the trigeminus. The short and broad cere- bellum (97. C. c,) not extending backwards to cover the fourth ventricle, that cavity is found protected externally by a highly vascular membrane (97. C. b.) The small trans- versely developed cerebellum consists only of the median lobe, without hemispheres, and consequently still is without the corpus dentatum in its interior ; it is smooth and cineri- tious without, and presents internally radiating fasciculi of white nervous fibres extending peripherad from its base. The great transverse commissure of the cerebellum, or the pons Varolii is still wanting, like the cerebellic hemispheres. The optic lobes (97- C. d, e,) reduced in their proportions, and provided with internal ventricles (e,) are partially encom- passed on their fore part by the large tapering hemispheres. The cerebral hemispheres (97- D. d,) destitute of convolu- tions, smooth and cineritious externally, hollow within, (97. C. g,) present internally the thalami optici and corpora striata (^,) and a distinct choroid plexus, (9J. C. h,) towards the median side of their contained ventricles. These hemi- spheres are broad and short in the crocodilian reptiles, and more lengthened, narrow, and tapering forwards in the in- ferior tribes, especially in the chelonia. Rudiments of cere- bellic hemispheres are also seen in the crocodiles. The ol- factory tubercles (97- D. g,) are much smaller than in fishes, cineritious externally, and placed in contact with the cerebral hemispheres. On the inferior surface of the brain in the chelonia (97- D,) we observe an intimate union and decussa- tion of the optic nerves (97. D./,) and behind these a long tubular hypophysis (97. D. e,) or continuation of the third ventricle into the infundibullum and petuitary gland. The pineal gland (97- C./,) is still exposed on the upper part of the brain between the optic lobes and the cerebral hemi- spheres. All the parts of the brain are more compacted to- gether in reptiles than in lower vertebrata ; the ganglia of the posterior or sensitive roots of the spinal nerves are now more conspicuous, like the lateral and splanchnic ganglia of the sympathetics ; and the spinal nerves come off more nearly opposite to the places of their respective destinations than in the lower classes. The nervous system of birds presents only a more elevated condition of the same plan of structure already developed in the crocodiles and inferior reptiles. The great centres of the nervous system in the vertebrated animals like those of the vascular, are at first developed in a lineal direction and ex- tended longitudinally, as we see in the fishes, but at length acquiring encreased lateral development, these parts, in both systems become compacted together and accumulate upon each other to form a more, short, circumscribed and rounded mass, more easily accommodated and protected, as we see in birds and mammalia. The spino-cerebral axis fills the osseous cavities which protect it, and the form and size of the upper part of the head now correspond with those of the enclosed brain at every period of life. The spinal chord, become more rounded in form, has an encreased proportion of grey ganglionic matter in its interior, and the white fibrous medullary portion is encreased in the brain. The enlarged cerebral parts being now collected into a more compact form, the hemispheres of the brain extend back- wards to cover the optic lobes, and come into contact with the greatly encreased cerebellum. The olfactory tubercles have much diminished, but retain their tubular communica- tion with the still small ventricles of the cerebral hemi- spheres. The cerebral hemispheres still destitute of convo- lutions and partially bilobate, and the median lobe of the ce- rebellum deeply laminated and sulcated transversely, are the parts here most developed in the cranium, and the white fibres of the great cerebral commissure, the corpus callosum, have begun to shoot across and unite the hemispheres. Not- withstanding the great transverse extension of the cerebral mass in adult birds, and its sudden tapering forwards to the olfactory nerves, giving the whole brain a triangular appear- ance, it presents the same lineal arrangement and longitudi- nal extension of its parts in the embryo, which are preserved as the permanent character of the nervous axis of fishes. This is easiest observed by examining its development in the transparent area of the cicatricula in the egg of the fowl, where we perceive after two days 5 incubation (Fig. 97. E,) the two halves of the spinal chord (E. a,) united posteriorly, and already forming the vesicular enlargement (97- E. ,) corres- ponding to the caudaequina and pelvic dilatation, orrhomboidal sinus of the adult. The cervical and dorsal vertebrae begin to embrace the anterior portion (97. E./,) of the chord, and three vesicular enlargements ar,e seen on the cephalic portion of the nervous axis. The posterior (97- E. c,) of these en- largements forms the rudimentary lobes of the medulla ob- longata, the middle dilatation (97. E. d,) constitutes the out- line of the optic lobes, the anterior (97- E. e,) and smallest cephalic enlargement forms the embryo condition of the cerebral hemispheres in the chick, and all these lobes are still disposed on the same plain, and in a longitudinal direc- tion, as we find them in the adult fishes and in the embryos of mammalia. They incline forwards as they develope up- wards and backwards and laterally, and in the adult condition the optic lobes, reduced in their proportion and forced down- wards and to the sides, are covered by the expanded cerebral hemispheres, which reach and even partially overspread the cerebellum. The spinal chord still extends into the coccy- geal vertebrae, and the decussating bands of the corpora py- ramidalia are more numerous and distinct than in the inferior vertebrata, as seen in the medulla oblongata of the stork, (Fig, 98. A. k.) The cylindrical spinal chord (98. A. ,) per- forated by a small canal dilates on entering the cranium into a wide and large medulla oblangata (98. A. b,) which is not yet traversed by a cerebellic commissure, or pons Varolii. The large cerebellum covers the fourth ventricle, which is ext3nded into it, as seen in the cassowary, (Fig. 98. B. d,f,) it consists of the vermiform or median lobe (98. B. d,) and a small rudiment of the lateral lobes or hemispheres (98. A. /,) and it is deeply sulcated transversely on the exterior, like the cerebellic hemispheres of mammalia. The numerous me- dullary bands which radiate outwards to the cineritious exte- rior lamellae, from the white fibrous parietes of the fourth ventricle (98. B../J) produce an arborescent appearance when the cerebellum is divided vertically. The ordinary great component fasciculi of the medulla oblongata are distinctly marked externally, and the same nerves arise from this part as in reptiles and mammalia. Where the lateral tubercles or rudimentary hemispheres of the cerebellum are most distinct, a small transverse commissure is already perceptible between them, asin the human embryo, but there is no corpus dentatum. The optic lobes (98. A. c,) reduced in size and separated from each other to the sides of the medulla oblongata by the encreasing cerebrum and cerebellum, are covered ex- ternally, like the other lobes of the brain, with cineritious matter, consist internally of white fibres, and present a small ventricle (98. B. g,) in each, like the cerebral hemispheres. They are proportionally small and round in the strutheous birds (98. B. g, g,) more lengthened and oval in the inferior birds (98. A. c, c,) and present between them transverse medullary bands, (98. B. k } ) forming a valvular commissure, on which rests the pineal gland (98. B. i,) with its two peduncles ex- tending forwards over the thalami optici. The optic thalami covered by the cerebral hemispheres are connected by a cine- ritious commissura mollis, the optic lobes are without trans- verse exterior sulci, and the hemispheres are destitute of convolutions though partially divided into two lobes, (98. A. d, e,) by the fissura sylvii. The cerebral hemispheres, covered externally with cineritious matter, smooth and undulated on the surface, broad posteriorly, and tapering suddenly forwards to the ethmoid bone, cover the thalami optici and the cor- pora striata, and contain each a small ventricle which extends forwards to the olfactory tubercles (98. A./.) The cerebral hemispheres (98. B. i,) are composed chiefly of the ascending and diverging fibres of the corpora pyramidalia and are con- nected by an anterior commissure, and the crossing fibres of a rudimentary corpus callosum. The olfactory tubercles (98. A./,) commencing from two medullary tracts (98. A. h, h,) on the inferior surface of the hemispheres, and containing prolongations of the lateral ventricles, are still covered with cineritious substance, and taper forwards to the olfactory nerves, greatly reduced from their proportions in the inferior vertebrata. The choroid plexus is obvious in each of the lateral ventricles, which communicate below with the third ventricle, and the corpora striata form lengthened transverse eminences. The third ventricle communicates behind with the fourth by the aqueductus Sylvii beneath the transverse valve of Vieussenius, and is continued downwards in front to the infundibulum and petuitary gland which here forms a shorter hypophysis on the sella tursica than in reptiles. All the lobes and cavities are immediately invested and lined by the pia mater, and the dura mater lining the cranium forms a distinct tentorium corebelli and a rudimentary falx ce- rebri. The sensitive spinal nerves of birds have their ganglia larger, and approximated more nearly to their origins than in reptiles, and from the retraction and high termination of the spinal chord, as well as the comparative magnitude of the legs in this class, the posterior ganglionic enlargement is re- markable for its size, and at this place the motor and sensitive roots pass out through separate foramina of the numerous anchylosed sacral vertebrae. The twelve pairs of cranial nerves are here distinct as in reptiles and mammalia. The olfactory nerves still provided with distinct glandular tubercles (98. A. /,) arise from two transverse medullary bands (98. A. h,) ex- tending, as in mammalia, to the fissure of Sylvius, and pass forward through the narrow tapering osseous canals formed by the frontal and ethmoid bones. The optic nerves (98. A. i y ) corresponding in magnitude with the large eyes and the optic lobes from which they originate, unite before the hypo- physis, and partially decussate their numerous interwoven component fasciculi before proceeding to the optic foramina. The motores oculorum pass to the three innermost recti mus- cles and the inferior obliquus of the eye, the trochlearis to the superior obliquus, and the abducens to the rectus exterior muscle, as in other classes. The large trigeminus sends its ophthalmic branch to the upper parts of the face and nose, the superior maxillary branch to the sides of the face and upper mandible, and the inferior maxillary branch chiefly to the lower jaw ; the two last branches exhibit a dental distri- bution in the serrated mandibles of many aquatic birds, as in the toothed jaws of quadrupeds. The smallness of the facial nerve corresponds with the immobility and insensibility of the superficial parts of the face, and the magnitude of the acoustic nerve, with the great development of their internal ear and their acute hearing, especially in nocturnal birds. The glosso-pharyngeal passes as usual to the tongue and pharynx, the hypo-glossal chiefly to the root of the tongue and upper larynx, and the pneumo-gastric, communicating at the base of the cranium with the accessory, descends with the jugular vein along the neck to be distributed on the lungs, the in- ferior larynx, the oesophagus and stomach, especially the ventriculus succenturiatus. The spinal nerves are chiefly cervical and sacral, from the number of vertebrae composing these parts of the column, and the brachial and lumbar plexuses are formed and distributed on the arms and legs, nearly as in quadrupeds. The sympathetic, greatly encreased in its development, presents distinct lateral ganglia from the base of the skull to the end of the coccyx, it unites anteriorly with the pneumo-gastric, the facial and the trigeminal nerves, and at its posterior end the lateral ganglia become approxi- mated and united on the median plain under the coccygeal vertebra. It forms distinct ganglia and plexuses around the great arteries, for the viscera of the trunk ; its cervical por- tion is protected, along with the vertebral arteries, in the foramina of the transverse processes ; and it is every where connected by anastomosing filaments with the spinal nerves along the sides of the vertebral column, as in other classes. In the mammiferous animals a higher grade of the develop- ment of this system is perceptible in the magnitude and ex- tension of the spinal chord, and of the cerebral and cere- bellic hemispheres, in the encreased number of internal cineritious deposits in all parts of the white fibrous spino- cerebral axis, in the more complete union of all the lateral parts of this axis by means of decussating fasciculi and various commissures of converging fibres, in the encreased size and approximation of the ganglia on all the symmetrical sensitive nerves, and in the more methodical and extensive distribution of the great sympathetic, and its appropriation to individual organs. The spinal chord, though encreased in its proportion to the bulk of the body, is now less in proportion to the cerebral mass than in the inferior classes ; its internal longitudinal canal has almost become obliterated ; its lateral halves are more intimately united together, and the crescentic columns of cineritious matter have en creased in their interior. The spinal chord is prolonged to a variable extent through the column, being shortest in the tailless cheiroptera, qua- drumana, and man, and longest in the cetacea, where it ex- tends tapering through the coccygeal vertebrae, without pos- terior enlargement, from the want of legs, as in apodal fishes, and tadpoles, and serpents, and the human embryo. In the long-tailed quadrupeds the spinal chord is extended to the sacrum, and the detached nerves of the cauda equina are prolonged through the coccygeal vertebrae. The ganglionic enlargement of the spinal chord at the origin of each pair of moto-sensitive nerves is now scarcely apparent, and the en- largements corresponding to the atlantal and sacral extremi- ties are of a more lengthened and fusiform shape. The medulla oblongata is comparatively narrow, but it is more deeply marked by the limits of the corpora pyramidalia, olivaria, and restiformia. The decussations of the corpora pyramidalia are more numerous and distinct, and the cine- ritious matter of the corpus dentatum is generally percep- tible in the corpora olivaria, which are themselves propor- tionally small. The crura cerebri are traversed below by the great commissure of the cerebellic hemispheres, the tuber annulare, which is more or less provided internally with transverse strata of cineritious matter. The optic lobes, reduced in size, generally without ca- vities, and traversed externally by sulci, which give them a quadrigeminous appearance, are largest and most exposed above in the lowest mammalia, as the rodentia and edentata, they are larger in herbivorous than in carnivorous quadrupeds, and are least in bulk, and most concealed in quadrumana and man. The anterior lobes of the corpora quadrigemina are larger than the posterior in herbivorous mammalia, the posterior are the larger in carnivora, and these lobes are nearly equal in the highest orders of this class. The ce- rebral hemispheres follow a contrary ratio in their deve- lopment, being smallest and destitute of convolutions in the rodentia, and becoming larger in every dimension and more marked with deep convolutions, as we advance up- wards to man. The optic thalami and the corpora striata encrease with the expanding hemispheres, while the olfactory tubercles progressively dimmish. The olfactory tubercles are greater in size, more cineritious externally, and contain wider prolongations of the lateral ventricles in herbivorous than in carnivorous quadrupeds. The lateral ventricles always present the anterior and inferior cornua, the choroid plexus, and the to3nia semicircularis between the thalami and the corpora striata. The great transverse commissure of the cerebral hemispheres, the corpus callosum, is here at its max- imum of development, as are also the anterior and posterior commissurse cerebri and the fornix, and we can always per- ceive the hippocampus major, the septum lucidum between the lateral ventricles, and the pineal gland with its two pe- duncles. The cineritious matter is now less abundant on the surface of the brain proportionally to the white fibrous part within, and the external convolutions, which are still wanting on the smooth bird-like brains of the montrema and the rodentia, are very superficial in the cetacea, edentata, ruminantia, and pachyderma. The convolutions penetrate deeper in the large expanded hemispheres of carnivora, qua- <lrumana and man, where we observe also the cerebrum to pass more and more backwards over the cerebellum. The symmetry of the convolutions on the two cerebral hemi- spheres is most distinct where they are few and deep, as in carnivora and quadrumana, and the laminae of the cerebellic hemispheres encrease in number and depth as we ascend to man. The brain of herbivorous quadrupeds is thus distin- guished by several indications of inferior development from that of carnivorous species, as seen in comparing the brain of the pecari, Dicotyles torquatus, (Fig. 99. A,) with that of the lion, Felis leo, (Fig. 99. B.) In the herbivora the spinal chord and medulla oblongata (99. A. #, b,) are larger and broader, compared with the cerebral parts which lie before them, than in the carnivora (99. B. a, b,) and in the carnivora the corpora pyramidalia (99. B. b } ) the crura cerebri (99, B. d,) the cerebral hemispheres (B. #, h,) the corpus callosum, the cerebellic hemispheres (B./,/,) and the tuber annulare (B.c,) are proportionally larger than the corresponding parts in the vegetable-eating quadrupeds (99. A.) The convolutions are more superficial on the narrow and short cerebral hemi- spheres of the pecari, (99. A. g, h,) the hollow olfactory tu- bercles or processus mammillares (99. A. 7c,) communicating by wide canals with the lateral ventricles, are larger ; the in- fundibulum (99. A. e,) like the hypophysis of a reptile, is more broad and extended ; the corpora quadrigemina are larger and less covered by the hemispheres, and the trans- verse sulcus divides them more posteriorly than in the lion, (99. B.) This transverse sulcus is wanting on the optic lobes of the ornithorhyncus, where they are nearly as smooth and undivided as those of a bird, and its cerebral hemi- spheres are destitute of convolutions, like those of many rodentia, edentata, and marsupialia. The broad cerebral he- mispheres of the lion are surpassed in lateral extension by those of the seals, and these parts in the dolphin surpass those of all the other mammalia by their great breadth and by the number of their superficial convolutions. But in none of these animals are the cerebellic hemispheres entirely covered by the extension backwards of the cerebral, till we ascend to the higher quadrumana, where we find in the pithed, or orangs, almost every other character of the human spino-cere- bral axis already distinctly developed, as the hippocampus minor and posterior cornu of the lateral ventricles, the deep cerebral convolutions and numerous cerebellic laminae, the cineritious substance of the corpora olivaria and the large corpora dentata, or ganglionic nuclei of the cerebellic hemispheres. While the great nervous centres have thus arrived at their maximum of development in mammalia, most of the cranial nerves, like the spinal chord, when compared to them, are proportionately small. The olfactory nerves and tubercles are largest in the ruminantia and pachydernia (99. A. k } ) smaller in the carnivora (99. B. i,) cheiroptera, and quadru- mana, and are scarcely discoverable in several of the cetacea. In the inferior orders and in the large eyed nocturnal qua- drupeds the optic nerves are of greater size than in diurnal and higher species, and in the blind subterranean moles not only are the optic nerves extremely minute, but the motores oculorum,. the trochleares, and the abducentes can scarcely be detected. The optic nerves in this class unite before the infundibulum, where they form a partial decussation of their component fibres (99. B. #,). and the ophthalmic ganglion is always perceptible in the orbit. The second and third branches of the trigeminus have a great external distribution in the long-muzzled, the proboscidian, and the large-lipped quadrupeds, as the cetacea, ruminantia, pachyderma, and car- nivora, and their internal dental distribution varies according to the number and magnitude of the teeth and of the per- forated fangs which they supply. Their development is also influenced by the presence of horns on the frontal or nasal bones, or of spines or bristles extending from the upper lip, as in aquatic and terrestrial carnivora, or by other circum- stances which influence the general form of the head or face ; and the same causes influence the development of the facial nerves and their branches, as in the inferior classes of verte- brated animals. The bills of the ornithorhyncus, like those of many aquatic birds, are supplied with large branches of the superior and inferior maxillary nerves, and the pneumo-gas- tric nerve in this animal is not united to the cervical portion of the sympathetic, as it generally is in the neck of quadru- peds. As the plan of development is most constant and ob- vious in the great centres of animal and of vegetative life, the spino-cerebral axis and the great sympathetic, it is chiefly in those parts that we observe the highest condition arrived at in the human body. The spinal chord of man (Fig. 100. b 9 i,) is smaller compared with the cerebral mass contained within the cranium than in other mammalia, and short from the want of caudal prolongation of the trunk ; its posterior and middle enlargements (100. c. e?,) are conspicuous, and of a lengthened form from the magnitude and number of the nerves which proceed from them to the sacral and atlantal extremities ; the cauda equina, ( 1 00. a, b,) is of great length from the high and sudden termination of the spinal chord; the motor roots (100. I, /,) and anterior columns are smaller than the sensi- tive, as in other animals, and the ganglia of the posterior or sensitive roots (100. ,) of the spinal nerves are here larger than in other mam- malia. The medulla oblon- gata, though comparatively small, has its component fasciculi most deeply marked, and the quantity of internal ganglionic matter in the course forwards of these white fibrous fasciculi, cor- responds with their great development in the human cerebral and cerebellic he- mispheres, where the convo- lutions (100. g,) and laminae, (100. h, i,) surpass in num- ber and depth those of al- most all inferior animals, but where the use or func- tion of any filament has not yet been determined. The great systems of converging fibres which cross the median plain, which form the corpus callosum, the tuber annu- lare, and the various smaller commissures, and which have appeared to some as conti- nuous with the diverging or ascending fibres from the periphery of the cerebral mass, and as forming the posterior or sensitive columns of the spinal chord by their descent from the brain, are larger than in the lower orders of quadrupeds. The periphery of the whole body is now the most largely supplied with symmetrical nerves of motion and sensation, whose roots are the most imbedded and approximated ; the great central columns of these nerves are the most intimately and compactly united to each other in every part of the axis, and in passing from the embryo state to this most complicated condition, the great spino-cerebral axis of man presents successively the various conditions exhibited as adult forms in the lower classes of animals. The great sympathetic also presents its highest condition of development in quadrupeds and man, being here most intimately united with all the spinal and cranial nerves from the caudal extremity of the trunk to the trigemini, or fifth pair of cranial nerves. It forms numerous distinct cineritious ganglia in the head, on both sides of the neck, along the two sides of the vertebral column, and in the three great cavities of the trunk, the thorax, the abdomen, and the pelvis, embracing with its large anastomos- ing plexuses and ganglia the great arteries proceeding to the viscera, and; thus it establishes in the most com- plicated of animal forms the greatest unity of action and mutual dependence of all the organs of animal and of vege- tative life. CHAPTER FIFTH ORGANS OF THE SENSES. FIRST SECTION. General Observations on the Organs of the Senses. THE power of locomotion enjoyed by animals, and their mode of nutrition by the conveyance of foreign matter into an internal sac, require them to possess the means of obtain- ing cognizance of the properties of surrounding objects, that they may direct their motions suitably to their ends, and distinguish what is congenial from what is deliterious to their nature. These means of establishing the most intimate relation between external objects and the internal sentient principle, are the organs of the senses, which are instruments placed at the peripheral extremities of certain sensitive nerves, generally those nearest the anterior extremity of the trunk, or around the entrance of the alimentary canal, and which vary in their structure according to the properties of outward matter to which they relate. The organs of the senses are thus necessarily placed in connexion with the external surface of animals, and are not situate upon any of the insen- sitive motor nerves which merely communicate activity to the muscular fibres, nor upon the great ganglionic or sympa- thetic system of unsymmetrical nerves by which the organs of vegetative life throughout every point of the body are kept in incessant activity without our consciousness, but only upon the distal terminations of the symmetrical sensi- tive filaments of the great nervous axis of animal life. In the vertebrated animals these optical, acoustic, and other in- struments destined to modify the external impressions so as to produce more distinct perceptions, are mostly placed at the ends of the sensitive nerves which issue from the inter- vertebral foramina of the cranium, and are supplied by other nervous branches indispensible to their function. The cir- cumstances which necessitate the existence of such organs in animals, also require them to be more numerous and va- ried in higher than in lower tribes, and to be most perfect and delicate where the locomotive powers, and consequently the dangers are greatest. Hence they are more developed in the active insects and other entomoid articulata, than in the slow and torpid mollusca, and are most numerous and perfect in the vertebrated animals where they have to watch over the most complicated and delicate forms of organisation. The columns of nerves appropriated to sensation are greater than those of motion throughout the animal kingdom, and they are spread more extensively through every part of the body, so that almost every point is sensitive to impressions of the density or resistance of outward bodies, to the feel- ings of heat and cold, and to that of pain when they are in- jured. This general sensibility, which watches over the well-being of every part of the body, is most acute in the skin, the common covering of all the organs, and the sensa- tions belonging to all the senses are but modifications of this, as their organs also are mostly developments from the cutaneous covering of the body. As the apparatus for diges- tion are the most important to the maintenance of life, and, next to the cutaneous covering, the most universal in the animal kingdom, the general sense of touch is probably first modified or speciallized at their entrance, to constitute that of taste which most immediately relates to this function; and so are successively developed the various other senses of animals, as those of smelling, hearing and vision, of which we are conscious, and which make known the physical or the chemical properties of external objects at greater and greater distances from the sentient body. The sentient nerves are thus very differently modified at their peripheral expanded terminations to adapt them for receiving impressions from bodies directly applied to the skin, or from sapid bodies dis- solved in the secretions of the mouth, or from odorous ema- nations diffused through the surrounding element, or from simple undulations of that element reaching the surface of the body, or from those finer vibrations which constitute the phenomena of light. There may be many other kinds of impressions derived from outward bodies, for which the sensitive nerves of the lower animals are adapted, besides those which affect us, and we cannot always be certain of the identity of the feelings communicated to them by organs which appear analogous to our own. Although we often cannot detect distinct organs for the senses which we ascribe to the lower animals, these organs are commonly enumerated according to the supposed generality of their function in the animal kingdom, from the most general feeling of the nervous system, or the sense of touch to that of vision or of hearing, but the most general organ of sense perceptible in animals, as superadded to the nerves of feeling already de- scribed, is that of vision which relates to light, so universally diffused through nature, and so influential on both kingdoms of organized beings and even on the constitution and proper- ties of unorganized bodies. SECOND SECTION. Organs of Vision. Many animals, like plants, are affected sensibly by light, without their exhibiting either organs of vision or a single filament of nervous matter. As plants, guided by light, open and close their flowers and their leaves, or follow with their expanded flowers the diurnal course of the sun, or seek his light with their slow-moving branches and their leaves with- out a perceptible nervous system, so we observe the nerve- less gemmules of poriferous animals, and of zoophytes guided by the same agent in selecting a proper place for fixing and developing ; the hydra, without eyes or nerves, uniformly moves to the light, the eyeless actinia shuns its influence, and many zoophytes expand or contract their whole body or their polypi from the influence of this agent though desti- tute of visual organs. Distinct organs, however, appropriated to light, are already perceptible in animals where no nervous filament has been detected in any part of the body. Many polygastric animal- cules, as the cercaria, are obviously sensible to light, and move towards it like the hydrse, and they generally present on the anterior part of their body one or more small round opaque red coloured spots which have long been recognised, figured, and described as the eyes of these minute animals. Several, as the euglena longicanda and ophryoglena flavicans, have but one eye, placed on the middle of the upper and anterior part of their body, a monoculous character in which they resemble the microscopic species of some higher classes of animals. Eyes have been detected in most of the genera of polygastrica, down to the monads which are mostly mono- culous, and even the minute monad-like beings which unite to form the volvox globator, the eudorina elegans, and some other remarkable compound or aggregate animalcules, are provided with single red-coloured organs of vision placed near the part of their trunk from which the caudiform vibra- tile appendix is prolonged. These minute red points of the polygastrica are as obviously eyes, though of the simplest structure, as are those of rotifera where we can perceive their optic nerves and ganglia, and where they have the same red colour and general disposition as in the polygastrica. This superficial or cutaneous opaque spot, to absorb the rays of light, without forming an image of external objects, is the first form of the eye which we see also in annelides and in the larvae of insects, and the young of higher classes, when that organ is beginning to develop ; so that when the optic nerve is superadded to this pigment, or choroid, or coloured rete mucosum, it is first developed behind this opaque mat- ter, as we frequently find it placed in the eyes of inverte- brated animals, even when transparent parts are added to collect light, or to form an image of external objects to be transmitted through a hole in this choroidal pigment to the subjacent nerve. The numerous vibratile organs of locomo- tion, and the rapid movements and free condition of polygas- trica require this general development of visual organs in them, while the slow movements or the fixed condition of most other radiated animals render less necessary in them the development of organs of this nature, and they have not been detected in any of the poripherous or the polypipherous animals, unless the bright coloured opaque points seen on the disk of the locomotive actiniae, and of some other polypi are organs destined to absorb and to communicate impres- sions of light. In the acalepha, organs of vision have yet been observed only in the medusa aurita, where they are mi- nute round points on the dorsal side of eight brown globules, placed on little peduncles, in the eight depressions around the free edge of the mantle, and they have the same red co- lour as those of many other transparent animals as polygas- trica, rotifera, and entomostracous Crustacea. These eight small, red, pedunculated eyes directed upwards, are provided each with a crystalline lens, an optic ganglion, and two de- cussating optic nerves derived from the exterior circle of nerves which accompany the marginal canal of the mantle, and they are placed near the bases of the marginal tentacula, like the numerous marginal pedunculated shining eyes of a spondylis or a pecten among the conchifera. The organs of vision in the echinoderma, as well as those of the acalepha, have been long figured by authors, though their nature has been till lately overlooked. Beneath the distal extremity of each radiating division of the body of the asterias violacea and asterias militaris, a small, circumscribed, round, red coloured, retractile point is observed, as represented by Vahl, which rests upon a small optic ganglion at the end of each of the five radiating nerves. These are analogous in their position and characters to the common visual organs of ani- mals thus low in the scale, and probably will be found on holothurise and other active echinoderma, where the nervous system is most developed. They yet present no transparent parts besides the cornea which has sometimes a glistening or shining appearance even in polygastrica. The organs of vision, like the nervous and muscular sys- tems and all the other organs of relation, present a high degree of development in the lively and active articulated animals, and they are common in almost every class of this division. From the general structure and habits of the entozoa and the density and opacity of the medium in which they commonly reside, they little require the aid of eyes or of any other or- gans of sense, and none have been detected in the lowest cystic forms of this class. In the scolex, however, among the ces- toid entozoa, two minute red-coloured shining eyes have been long observed, and two of a dark colour are found be- hind the mouth in the polystoma, one of the flat trematoid worms. But these organs are more commonly perceived on those remarkable entomoid kinds of parasitic worms which attach themselves to the surface of aquatic animals, and are in that situation more exposed to the influence of light and of the surrounding element, as various forms of lernsese. The eyes are sessile in these epizoa, and most commonly form a single organ on the median plain, as in many of the entomostracous Crustacea which they at first so much re- semble. In some the eyes are more numerous, and are placed apart from each other, as in the gyrodactylus auricu- latus, found attached to the gills of the bream, where there are four minute red-coloured eyes, placed in two pairs be- hind each other on the back part of the head. In the ach- theres percarum, there is a single round prominent eye on the fore part of the head, between the two short antennae, which is very obvious through the coverings of the ovum, and in the young animal in its free unattached condition, and in this species the organ of vision remains through the whole of life. But in the lernceocera cypinacea, where the little red coloured circular eye, placed on the fore part of the head, is also distinctly seen in the ovum, and continues through- out the free and entomostracous state of this remarkable animal, it is entirely lost after the metamorphosis and no trace of it can be detected in the adult fixed condition of this parasitic worm. The same disappearance of the eyes has been observed in some of the rotifera. In nearly all the rotiferous animalcules, however, eyes are distinctly observ- able, of a round form, of a red colour, often two in number, sometimes united to form a single organ, sometimes four as in the meglotrocha, or a greater number as in the cydoglena, and placed on the upper and fore part of the body. Their constancy x their number, and their high development in the wheel-animalcules corresponds with the general advanced organization and the numerous active organs of locomotion possessed by these minute transparent animals. From the transparency of all their parts and the deep red colour of the choroidal pigment the eyes of the rotifera, like those of the epizoa and those of most of the higher articulata and mol- lusca, are very obvious in the embryos while yet within the ovarium, or while the unhatched ova are yet suspended from the exterior of the parent. They are commonly placed near the large supra-oesophageal ganglion, and nervous filaments are sometimes observed distinctly to pass into these organs. They are protected by a smooth transparent and sometimes glistening cornea, and when these little eyes are pressed be- tween plates of mica or glass, the eye-ball is seen to burst, and the deep red pigment, consisting of minute globules united together by a transparent matter, is seen to escape from the ruptured organ. A minute crystalline lens has also been observed in some, behind the transparent cornea. The fixed condition of the cirrhopods in their adult state, inverted in their shell, and the opacity of their exterior covering, afford little occasion for the employment of visual organs in that condition of their life, and they have not been observed in any of the mature animals of this class. Before their metamorphosis, however, in their young and free con- dition, the cirrhopods possess a distinct black coloured me- dian organ of vision formed by the juxta-position of the two lateral eyes as in many monoculous animals of other classes. These two eyes, formed by the division of one primary organ, appear to be covered with a smooth transparent cornea and to enclose a small crystalline lens, and they are lost by the metamorphosis like the eyes of many other articulated animals. In most of the free annelides there are numerous and very distinct organs of vision, which commonly project shining or glistening from the dorsal surface of the head, and contain a minute transparent lens added to the variously coloured dark pigment and the optic nerve. The eyes are here generally sim- ple, sessile, slightly moveable, and placed apart from each in transverse or longitudinal rows. In the little prostoma arma- tum the head is covered with oculiform points of a dark colour, in the minute prostoma clepsinoideum, a small planaria, there are six of these organs, and in other species of prostoma four are observed. Several of the planaria have two deep co- loured eyes, in some as the planaria viganensis, there is a single row of about forty eyes, passing round all the fore part of the body, and the same arrangement is seen in the planaria nigra, which corresponds with the circular arrange- ment of the same organs around the margin of the mantle in some of the most active conchifera. The same transverse arrangement is seen in the ten prominent eyes disposed across the head of the medicinal leech. In the bdella nilotica there are six eyes disposed transversely on the upper part of the first segment, in the polynoe impatiens they are disposed laterally in pairs. The optic nerves of some of the higher annelides are observed to terminate in a broad circular pa- pilla or retinal expansion. The choroid pigment behind the crystalline lens in the medicinal leech is red in the young animal and changes to black in the adult state, as observed in many other animals. In the nereis nuntia (Fig. 14) there are four large eyes disposed symmetrically in two pairs on the upper part of the head, and nearly a hundred smaller ocular points disposed in rows and groups on all the promi- nent lobes around the mouth. In the syllis monilaris, there are two pairs of eyes with prominent glistening cornese dis- posed on the upper segment of the head. In some of the higher forms of this class, however, as the euphrosine laureata and the oenone lucida, the visual organs are reduced to two, symmetrically disposed on the upper part of the first seg- ment of the head, and thus approach to the normal character of these organs in most of the higher classes of animals. In the entomoid classes of articulata, the most active of all the invertebrated animals, the organs of vision are very nume- rous and commonly aggregated together to form two groups, or two compound eyes symmetrically disposed on the upper or la- teral parts of the head a compound character which com- mences as low as the rotifera by the approximation of the se- parate ocular points. The eyes of the myriapods partake some- times of the character of those of the inferior annelides and sometimes of those of the higher forms of insects, and in some species no organs of vision have been detected. Most of these animals present numerous separate simple eyes grouped together on the two sides of the head. The two lateral eyes of the scolopendra consist each of a group of about twenty-three small distinct eyes approximated and placed in lineal rows, and the aggregate eyes of the iulus are also composed of several rectilineal rows. The scuttgera has large eyes like those of an insect, where however the several cornese are more round and larger than in the compound organs of the true hexapodous insects. The compound eyes of insects consist merely of a closer ag- gregate of many of these more detached organs of the myria- pods, forming hemispherical sessile masses of sometimes ten or twenty thousand eyes on each side of the head, and these are often accompanied by a few small separate simple eyes placed more posteriorly. Lewenhoek calculated 1200 facetts in the eye of a libellula. They are compound even in the apterous lepisma, where they are accompanied by three simple eyes, as in many of the higher winged insects, but the coleop- terous insects, which approach nearest to the higher crus- tacea in the concentrated forms of many of their organs, possess only the two compound eyes. The larvae of the co- leoptera and hymenoptera are often destitute of eyes. In the compound eyes of insects the epidermis appears to continue, as we see in serpents, over the exposed surface of the globe, but colourless, and transparent. Beneath this ex- terior covering are placed the numerous transparent prismatic hexagonal facettes, or corneae of the several minute compo- nent eyes, as seen in the annexed section of a part of the eye of melolontha vulgaris, (Fig. 101. A. .) Within this thick continuous exterior layer of aggregated transparent hexagonal corneas are placed the small conical transparent lenses, (101. A. b, B. b 9 ) of a regular tapering form and smooth rounded surface, of a firm horny texture and colourless transparency. The hexagonal corneas of the sphinx atropos are only the sixtieth of a line in diameter. The flat bases of the lenses directed outwards are applied to the inner surface of the corneee, and their pointed apex is turned inwards to the pe- ripheral or retinal ends of the separate minute optic nerves (101. A. c.) These small conical horny lenses are easily scraped off from the inner surface of the cornea when their regular form and smooth surface (101. B. b, b,) are best ex- amined, and they acquire a whitish opaque colour by the ac- tion of alcohol, like the fibrous lenses of the higher classes of animals. They are surrounded by the choroid pigment, and in some insects, as the libellula, this coloured choroid forms a sort of iris or uvea between the flat base of the lenses and inner surface of the cornese, and appear to leave space for a small quantity of aqueous humour. The lenses are very long in the eyes of the libellulse, where they form lengthened slender nearly parallel cylinders tapering very slightly to the retinal ends of the optic nerves. They are generally shorter in proportion to their breadth in other insects, like those of the melolontha (101. B. b, b.) The separate slender optic nerves (101. A. c 9 ) proceed backwards from the apices of the lenses, though the semifluid pigment or vitreous humour, consisting of variously coloured globules to the great optic ganglion within the globe of the eye, which is almost a prolongation of the cerebral or optic lobes them- selves (Fig. 83. D. 1.) The undulations or rays of light have thus an uninterrupted passage in the compound eyes of insects through the outer transparent homogenous epidermic covering, then through the transparent central axes of the prismatic hexagonal cornese, and lastly through the pupilar openings of the choroid and the axes of the conical hard lenses behind them, where they reach the terminal or retinal papillae of the several optic nerves, by which the impressions are felt or transmitted to the brain. Besides these compound eyes, insects in their mature state often present at the back part of the head several simple de- tached sessile eyes or ocelli, like those common in the infe- rior articulated classes, and these are alone developed in the larva-state of insects with perfect metamorphosis, as those of orthoptera. In these ocelli of the larvae, as shown by Lyonet in that of the cossus ligniperda, nearly the same structure exists as in each of the component organs in the compound eye of the perfect insect. There are six ocelli in the cossus, disposed in a circular order on the parietal lamina, they have a cup-like form, each is covered with its convex cornea, having a transparent axis, and behind this is the little hard spherical crystalline lens, together with the vitreous humour, the chorid and its pigment, and the optic nerve. Each ocellus receives a branch of a trachea along with its nervous filament, and the tracheae have been traced also into the compound eyes of perfect insects. Most generally there are three ocelli, in perfect insects, behind each compound eye, on the sides of the head. Some insects, as the claviger, appear to possess neither simple nor compound eyes, nor any other organ of vision, like many of the helminthoid animals beneath them. The eyes of the higher forms of insects are thus numerous, and varied in their directions, from the ses- sile and immoveable character of these organs, and to suit the rapid and varied movements of these animals \ and they compensate for the want of the external protecting apparatus of higher classes, by the density and insensibility of the out- ward exposed parts of these organs, which they cleanse from adhering matter by the brushes of hair developed on their tarsi, or some other moveable parts. Hairs are often deve- loped from the surface of the compound eyes, originating from the depressions between the hexagonal cornese, and some- times the margins of the corneae are themselves extended outward like the hexagonal tubes of a honey-comb, as in the sty fops. The eyes of the arachnida are the largest and most perfect forms of the ocelli met with in the articulated classes ; like those of the myriapods they are simple and sessile organs, while those of Crustacea are compound, like those of insects, and are generally pedunculated. From two to twelve of these smooth eyes are found in the arachnida, and the largest forms of the organs are presented by the scorpions where their structure has consequently been most satisfactorily ex- amined. They are commonly arranged symmetrically in one or two transverse rows on the upper and fore part of the ce- phalo-thorax, as we observe those, generally eight in number, arranged on the back of the spiders. Beneath the prominent convex cornea in the large ocelli of the scorpion there is a spherical firm transparent lens, more like that of a molluscous or of a vertebrated animal than that commonly found in the entomoid articulata. There is a considerable vitreous humour filling half of the eye-ball, placed behind the crystalline lens, and surrounded by the pigmentum and the choroid, excepting on the fore part, where it bounds the pupil like an iris, and on the back part, where it is penetrated by the optic nerve. The optic nerve expands into a cup-like retina investing, with the hyaloid membrane, all the convex posterior surface of the vitreous humour. A disposition of the vitreous humour with its retinal and hyaloid membranes, very similar to this, has been observed even in the compound eyes of some noc- turnal lepidopterous insects, which is perhaps more general in that class. So that this optical instrument has already all the essential parts presented by the highest forms of the organ, and approaches the nearest to that of the vertebrata. The structure of the simple eyes or ocelli of the mygaleand of the tarantulse appears to be the same as that of the scorpion. The eyes of crustaceous animals are compound, like those of insects ; in the higher orders they are pedunculated, and moveable by means of muscles inserted within their exterior hard sclerotic covering ; they are commonly sessile and immove- able, like those of insects, in the inferior Crustacea; and in the lowest entomostracous forms the two sessile eyes are frequently united on the median plain, to form a single organ, a character approximating these parasitic Crustacea to the epizoa and to many other inferior articulata. The internal structure of these compound eyes is nearly the same as those of insects, and was early illustrated by Lewenhoek, who first observed the numerous small conical crystalline lenses within the exterior layer of contiguous prismatic transparent cornese in the astacus fluviatilis. The epidermis in the compound eyes of Crustacea passes transparent and homogeneous over the exterior surface of the thick layer of prismatic cornese, which are here, as in insects, generally hexagonal, but sometimes quadrangular, and to the internal ends of the prismatic cornese are applied the broad bases of the hard tapering transparent lenses which have their internal truncated apices directed to the retinal expansions of the numerous optic nerves. The whole sides of these transparent conieal lenses, as well as the optic nerves extending back- wards from their inner ends, are covered, as in insects, with the dark choroid pigment, so that only a small pencil of light gains admission through these long narrow darkened tubes to the small aperture at the posterior truncated ends of these lenses, where the optic nerves terminate, as usual, in their small soft retinal expansion. The optic nerves through- out their course in the eye-ball are enveloped in the same dark pigment which coats the lenses. The lenses in the cray-fish and in the palcemon sulcatus, are not round in their outline, but four-sided truncated pyramids ; most generally, however, they are regular smooth cones truncated at their interior apex, and they are seen of this form even under the smooth and undivided corneas spread over the eyes of mono- culi. In the compound eyes of the branchipus stagnalis, how- ever, it has been recently observed that, behind the smooth surface of the corneas, there are distinct round or ovate lenses supported each on the anterior end of an elongated vitreous humour. This vitreous body tapers backwards to the optic nerve, it is enclosed in a hyaloid membrane which embraces also the posterior half of the lens, and it is entirely covered externally by a retinal expansion of the optic nerve as far as the middle of the lens ; thus presenting a structure similar to that lately detected in the compound eyes of several insects. There are about five thousand eyes in the two com- pound organs of the lobster. The optic nerves in the Crustacea, as in insects, enlarge into an optic ganglion within the globe of the compound eye, from which ganglion the small filaments radiate outwards to the separate lenses of the component eyes, and each minute eye appears to have a pupilar extension of the choroid around the anterior surface of its lens. Thus the compound eyes of the Crustacea and of insects are but repetitions of the simple organs of the leech and the planaria, and probably of the ocular papillae of the hydatina, the medusa and the monad. The mobility so re- markable in the pedunculated eyes of the decapods is already perceptible in the elevation and retraction of the isolated organs of the annelides, and this power of varying the direc- tion of the organs is greatly en creased in the pedunculated eyes of mollusca and even of some fishes. In the great deve- lopment of the cornea and the lens throughout the articulated classes, we observe the early perfection of the most dense and refractive parts, on which the optical properties of this organ chiefly depend. The organs of vision are less required and less generally developed in the slow moving or fixed molluscous animals than in the active articulated classes, and they are never aggregated together to form groups of simple eyes, like those of myriapods or arachnida, nor compound organs like those of insects and Crustacea. Where they occur in the acephalous mollusca they are numerous, simple, and separate as in worms, but in the higher forms of gasteropods, pteropods and cephalopods their structure is more complex and their num- ber is reduced to two, which are symmetrically disposed on the sides of the head, as in all the vertebrated classes. The tunicated animals, like the cirrhopods in their adult state and like most of the entozoa, fixed and buried under an opaque covering, appear to be destitute of visual organs, and for the same reason these organs are as little required and are wanting in most of the inhabitants of bivalve shells. In the free and quick moving pectens, however, which swim rapidly backwards by the quick and repeated contractions of their valves, there are numerous distinct pedunculated eyes, placed at the bases of the palleal tentacula all around the free margins of the mantle, and these have long been figured and recognised by naturalists as organs of vision common to many of the conchiferous mollusca. They are placed in the most exposed and the most sensitive part of the animal, and by their pedunculated character and their position beside the tentacula they resemble the eyes of gasteropods. They are nearly a quarter of a line in diameter and more than fifty in number in the pecten maximus. They have a round promi- nent smooth cornea and contain an opaque shining choroid embracing a small crystalline lens. Their nerves are probably as in the gasteropods, derived from the tentacular branches passing along the bases of their peduncles. Their forms, dis- tribution and structure are the same in the spondyli as in the pectens, and their shining lustre, in both these genera, is compared to that of the emerald by Poli who has given en- larged views of their microscopic structure. The eyes of the gasteropods are always two in number, placed on the ante- rior part of the body, moveable, and generally pedunculated. Some of the naked dorsibranchiate gasteropods as the eolis, the doris, and the glaucus appear to be destitute of these organs. In the naked aplysia they appear as minute black points on the smooth surface of the neck. In the pectini- branchiate species they are most frequently placed on tuber- cles extended from the bases of the two tentacula, as seen in the annexed figure of the common cyprcea tiff res (Fig 102.) from the South Seas, where the two long tentacula (102. , a,) present near their bases two prominent, round, black and moveable eyes (102. c, c,) with smooth glistening transparent cornese. The tentacula being extended above the mouth (102. b,) and anterior to the syphon (102. d), the eyes, which are raised on tubercles at some distance from the base of the long slender tentacula, have a considerable range of vision. Above the large expanded foot (102. g, #), is seen the inner surface of the mantle (102. e), turned up over a portion of the shell (102. h) 9 and covered with small ramified tentacular extensions (102. /), which apprise the animal of danger from behind. In some of the gasteropods, as the haliotis, Umax, helix, and onchidium, the peduncles of the eyes are as long as the tentacula themselves. According to Chiaje the doris and the thetis have pedunculated eyes, and Ehrenberg has observed organs of vision in the hexabranchus and the phyllidia. The position of these small dark eyes at the exterior of the base of the tentacula is already represented in the buccmum undatum (Fig. 22. d, d), and in the harpa elongata (Fig. 92. s, s,) where they are a little further re- moved from the base ; and in the carinaria mediterranea (Fig. 89. f, /), where the optic nerves are seen passing to them directly from the cerebral ring (89. i). The internal structure of these simple eyes of the gasteropods much re- sembles that of the large ocelli of the scorpions and other arachnida. In the eyes of the helix pomatia, which are raised to the ends of long tubular muscular peduncles exceed- ing the length of the tentacula, Swammerdam observed a thin aqueous humour, a more consistent vitreous humour, a pupil and iris, and a distinct crystalline lens ; and in the eyes of the cyclostomum viviparum, as well as in that anato- mised by Swammerdam, a distinct crystalline lens, a coloured choroid coat, and also an iris were detected and described by Stiebel. The structure of the eye in the helix pomatia and in the murex tritonis has also been described and represented by Muller (Fig. 103). The eye of this helix (103. A. a), is attached to one side of a large moveable bulb (103. A. b), and presents a compressed crystalline lens (103. B. a), a thin aqueous fluid, and a larger vitreous body (103. B. b), covered by the dark choroid coat. This ocular bulb (103. A. b), with its attached eye (103. A. ), can be extended from, or retracted into the sheath of its tubular peduncle, and is supplied with a large nerve (103. A. d), which gives off the optic (103. A. c), as is done by the tentacular branch in most other gasteropods. A similar bulb is seen attached to the eyes in some other mollusca (Fig . 93. A. c). Blainville ob- served a large crystalline lens in the eye of the voluta cym- bium, which projected anteriorly like that of a sepia, a small pupilar opening of the choroid behind the transparent skin which formed a distinct convex corneee over the organ, and two small muscles behind for the motion of this sessile eye. A similar structure nearly was found by Muller in the large eyes of the murex tritonis (Fig. 103. C. D. E), where they occupy their most frequent position at the outer part of the base of the tentacula (103. C. a). In a few of the gastero- pods they are placed on the inner part of the base of the tentacula. The delicate skin of the tentaculum (C. a), forms a thin transparent cornea (C, b), over the eye and leaves a considerable chamber for the thin aqueous fluid anterior to the iris (103. D. b,) and the pupil (103. D. a). The eye is lengthened in the direction of its visual axis, and the black circular iris (103. C. d. D. b), continued from the coloured choroid, presents a large round pupil directed obliquely outwards from the base of the tentaculum. The interior of the large cavity surrounded by the choroid and its pigment, appears to be chiefly occupied by the irregular round pellucid amber-coloured mass of the crystalline lens (103. E), and the optic nerve (103. C. e), which comes off from the common tentacular nerve, enters the eye-ball ob- liquely on the outside of the axis of vision. The organs of vision, two in number and placed on the sides of the head in the pteropods, though small in their dimensions, have pro- bably an internal structure similar to that found in most of the gasteropods. The position of these organs is seen in the cymbulia of Peron (Fig. 24. c) and in the clio of the South Seas (Fig. 6J. A, b), they are also obvious on the head of the cleodora. In the cephalopodous animals these organs pre- sent the greatest size and the most complicated structure met with in any of the invertebrated classes, and they are even of great size in proportion to the magnitude of the head and to the general bulk of the body. As in the higher Crustacea, and in some of the gasteropods and cartilaginous fishes, the eyes are sometimes pedunculated in the animals of this class as in the nautilus and the loligopsis (Fig. 93. A. c), and they already present distinct external muscles for their movements, and palpebral folds of the surrounding skin, which passes transparent like a conjunctiva over their anterior surface to form a smooth cornea, as in other mollusca. Like the eyes of fishes, they are generally flattened in front from the defici- ency of aqueous humour, and they are of great size from the magnitude of the optic ganglion (Fig. 93. C. c), which is greater than the brain (93. C. a), and from the glandu- lar masses (93. C. e, e,) contained within the outer layer of the choroid and the thickened posterior portion of the sclerotic (93. C. b), behind the retina and the inner layer of the choroid as in the eyes of fishes. But a small part therefore of these large organs is occupied with the trans- parent optical apparatus, and their movements are nearly as limited as those of a murex or a buccinum. There is a rudi- ment of the membrana nectitans, or third eye-lid so gene- rally developed in the vertebrated classes and the eye-lids, like the iris, are still almost motionless. The ciliary pro- cesses, as in the higher cartilaginous fishes, are remarkable for their great development, and the crystalline lens for its double structure and its great posterior convexity; it occu- pies two thirds of the axal diameter of the eye in most of the naked cephalopods, and consists of two plano-convex hemi- spheres of unequal size applied to each other by their flat surfaces. The vitreous humour, of a thin fluid consistence, is enclosed in a distinct cellular hyaloid membrane, and the soft loose pigment of the inner layer of the choroid is gene- rally of a deep purple colour. In the loligo there is a small aperture on the surface leading to the glandular cavity of the eye like a lachrymal pore. The retina of the cephalopods is placed, as in other animals, within or anterior to the pigment and the inner layer of the choroid, as shown long since by Chiaje, and the crystalline lens is composed of concentric layers of minute transparent fibres, like that of vertebrated animals. Thus in the isolated organs of vision of the mollus- cous classes we constantly observe a crystalline lens and transparent parts anterior to the optic nerves as in the higher articulata; and in the general plan of their formation and the higher complexity of their structure they form a nearer approach to the ordinary condition of these organs in fishes and higher vertebrated classes. The eyes are two in number and symmetrically disposed on the sides of the head in all the vertebrated classes and nearly in all the species, and the differences which they pre- sent relate chiefly to the density of the media through which the various animals receive the rays of light, and the extent of development of the external protecting parts of these delicate organs. From the imperfect development of the nervous system of fishes and the obscurity of the element through which they move, their organs of vision are of great size, and from the density of the watery medium around them, they have little necessity for aqueous humour in the eye, and their cornea is flat. To preserve the eye of fishes flat in front, the sclerotic is thickened and consolidated, as in the cetacea, and it is also to prevent its assuming the spherical form in birds, by the equal pressure of the contained fluids, that the sclerotic is there strengthened with osseous plates, which pre- serve the tubular form of the eye and the great convexity of the cornea in that class. This thickness of the sclerotic coat and the presence of the choroid gland and adipose substance between the layers of the choroid coat behind, and the flat- ness of the cornea in front shorten very much the visual axis of the eye and diminish the space for containing the vitreous humour ; hence a completely spherical form and great size and density of the crystalline lens are here required to bring the rays of light more quickly to a focus as seen in the eye of the perch (Fig. 104. A. e). The crystalline lens is composed, as in other classes, of minute transparent fibres, which are disposed in concentric layers and variously united by their serrated edges, the layers encreasing in density from the surface to the centre of the lens. The diameter of the lens (104. A. e) is often greater than that of the aqueous and the vitreous humours, and concentrates the rays of light to a focus before the retina, so as to form an inverted image on that membrane. The conjunctiva is now more easily sepa- rated from the cornea than in the cephalopods, and the choroid and retina are here remarkable for the distinctness of the coats of which they are composed. Their eye-lids are still as rudimentary as in the cephalopods, and the liquid element around them is their only lacrymal as well as their salivary fluid. The pupil is large in fishes and the iris is almost motionless. The outer layer of the choroid passes with its shining pearly lustre over the front of the iris, and the dark inner layer lines the posterior surface of the uvea. This inner layer forms a kind of pecten, passing obliquely forwards to- the lens, but without the pigment which covers it in birds. The ciliary ligament is always present, but the ciliary processes are rarely developed, and the foramen centrale is not perceptible in the axis of vision. The eyes are generally quite lateral in their direction, and notwith- standing the great irregularity of their outward form, the sphericity of the retina is generally preserved by the glandu- lar and adipose substances interposed behind between the layers of the choroid coat. The sclerotic is easily perceived to be continuous with the sheath of the optic nerve and the dura mater, and sometimes, as in the xiphias, the consoli- dated portion of the sclerotic envelopes the ball of the eye like an osseous band, with a thickened anterior round margin to receive the circumference of the cornea and to support the periphery of the iris. The fatty substance commonly depo- sited between the layers of the choroid at the back of the eye in fishes is traversed by numerous branches from the ocular artery, and by the ciliary veins returning to the choroid gland. The inner of the two layers of the choroid is often distinctly separable into two, an exterior formed by the straight parallel ciliary veins, and an interior, formed by the ramifications of the ciliary arteries, on which the pigment rests. The optic nerve (104. A. g), generally presents a con- tracted appearance at the place where it penetrates the vas- cular layer of the choroid (104. A. k) 9 and expands into a soft and pulpy retina which terminates by an even margin near the base of the uvea. The organs of vision are smallest in anguilliform fishes and such as burrow in the mud or sand ; they are larger in predaceous fishes which frequent the dark depths of the wide ocean than in those which reside on the shallow coasts or in fresh waters ; their mobility is encreased in the active muscular plagiostome fishes by being supported on cartilaginous peduncles ; they are moved in fishes by four recti and two ooliqui muscles as in higher vertebrata ; they are very rarely directed to one side of the head, as in the pleuronectes ; sometimes the eye-lids are so perfect as to be provided with distinct orbicular or sphincter muscles 5 and in several fishes the upper edge of the iris extends down in form of a vine leaf over the middle of the pupil. The pearly lustre of the exterior choroid seems due to crystalline spicula, and from the deficiency of internal pigment the eyes of many cartilaginous fishes have an internal shining lustre, like the tapetum of the eye of quadrupeds. The eyes of amphibious animals are generally interme- diate in their form and structure between those of fishes which receive the rays of light constantly through the dense medium of water, and those of the higher air-breathing classes which receive them through the rare medium of the atmosphere. These organs are still therefore of great size, and flat in front from the small quantity of aqueous humour, especially in the perennibranchiate species which more constantly reside in the water. From the imperfect ossification of the orbit the eyes have great lateral extent of motion, they are provided with an upper and lower eye-lid, and a very complete membrana nictitans, and as in other oviparous vertebrata the lower eye-lid is more developed and more moveable than the upper. The eye is large and provided with a thick and firm sclerotic, as in fishes, in the frog and the toad, but is very small in the pipa where it is destitute of eye-lids, and the crystalline lens is spherical, as in most other amphibia and in fishes. The outer layer of the choroid has the pearly lustre of that of fishes and passes shining over the fore-part of the iris around a pupil still almost motionless, the ciliary processes are not developed, and the retina forms a thick and pulpy external layer like that of fishes. The eyes appear to be still destitute of lachrymal apparatus, as in the former class, and in the proteus the organs of vision are covered over by the opaque integuments of the head. The eyes of reptiles are more adapted to receive the rays of light from the rare medium of the atmosphere than those of fishes or amphibia, their cornea is therefore gene- rally more convex, their aqueous and vitreous humours more abundant, and their lens less spherical in form. They are generally provided with the ordinary straight and oblique muscles, a distinct lachrymal apparatus, two moveable eye- lids, and a membrana nictitans. In serpents the skin forming the eye-lids passes transparent and continuous over the eyes and their lachrymal organs, and the epidermis is thus shed from the closed eye- lids as from the rest of the skin ; the tears here bathe the concealed conjunctiva, and pass by the lachrymal duct into the nose, as in higher animals. But in the slow-worm, the eye-lids and the membrana nictitans are formed as in saurian reptiles. The sclerotic is sometimes firm and cartilaginous, sometimes it contains adipose sub- stance behind the retina as in fishes, and in many as the crocodilian reptiles, the iguana, the lizard, and the monitor, and the tortoises and turtles, the fore part of the sclerotic supports a circle of osseous plates which surround the transparent cornea, as in birds. These plates around the cornea existed also in the ichthyosaurus. The ciliary pro- cesses are now considerably developed around the margin of the flattened lens, especially in the crocodilian reptiles, and the greater freedom and mobility of the iris from the abundance of aqueous humour, allows of more extensive and quick changes in the diameter of the pupil than in the inferior vertebrata. The pupil is often extended vertically in saurian and ophidian reptiles, as in many carnivorous mammalia, and a dark pecten in many lacertine and cro- codilian reptiles, is prolonged from the choroid coat into the vitreous humour, as in birds. The pulpy and fibrous layers are obvious in the retina, and its central foramen is seen in many of the species. The eyes of the chamseleon do not move simultaneously, the two eye-lids are united over the eye excepting a small vertical slit opposite to the middle of the pupil, and the concealed membrana nictitans is nearly as large as in birds. In the eye of emys europaea (Fig. 104. B.) the cornea () is pretty convex from the abundance of aqueous humour (b) in the anterior chamber, and the margin of the cornea is supported by ten osseous plates (104. C. d.) imbricated like those of birds, and placed in the anterior part of the sclerotic (104. B. d, d,) near to the ciliary processes, (104. B. /.) and to the fixed margin of the iris (104. B. e.) The crystalline lens (104. B. g.) has a compressed eliptical form, and a smaller axis than the vitreous humour (104. B. h.) The retina terminates with a thickened edge at the beginning of the ciliary pro- cesses, and a similar structure is presented in most of the chelonian reptiles. The eyes of birds are adapted in all their parts for the rare medium through which they receive the rays of light, and for sudden changes in the density of that medium, and in the intensity of light, and for the varying distances and directions of their objects of vision, and by their high development and their magnitude they compensate for the imperfect condition of most of the other organs of sense. From the lateral position of the eyes and the great projection of the cornea they command an extensive field of vision, and from this circumstance and the great mobility of their head and their long neck the large organs of vision of birds are less moveable in their orbits than those of qua- drupeds. They are the most remote in structure and form from those of fishes, which accords with the difference of density in the media of vision, and the fluids now most abundant in their interior are the least refractive, the aqueous and the vitreous, while the crystalline lens is flattened in its form and reduced in the density of its texture and in the space which it occupies in the axis of the eye. To prevent the sphericity of the eye, from the equal pressure of the contained fluids, and to preserve a great convexity of the transparent cornea especially in rapaceous birds, the anterior margin of the sclerotic is strengthened by a circular series of quadrangular moveable imbricated osseous plates, disposed between its coats around the edge of the cornea as in many reptiles, and which often give a conical or even a tubular form to the fore-part of the eye, as seen in the large nocturnal eyes of the long eared owls. The tough posterior mem- branous part of the sclerotic, forms a great hemisphere occupied almost entirely by the vitreous humour, and filling the very large orbits of the cranium, and from the quantity of space occupied by the thin and yielding aqueous and vitreous humours in the eyes of birds, they are probably more easily and quickly adjusted to the different distances of surrounding objects, and to the varying density of the medium through which they see. The thin convex dense cornea is here removed to a distance from the iris by the abundant aqueous humour occupying the anterior chamber, and from the rapid evaporation of this fluid it quickly sinks to flatness or to a concavity externally after death* The cornea is least convex, and the eyes are smallest in the aquatic birds, where the food is often distinguished more by the sen- sibility of the lips than by the organs of vision, and they are largest in the nocturnal birds of prey where they are directed forwards, with their axes nearly parallel, and the pupils are of great size, to receive the strongest impression from a feeble light. The choroid coat, consisting as usual of two layers, of a dark colour, is lined internally with a thick deposit of black pigment which appears to be com- posed of globular particles with a transparent centre, and a prolongation of this dark membrane covered with its pigment, is extended forwards through the vitreous humour, from the lineal entrance of the optic nerve to the capsule of the crystalline lens to which its anterior margin is attached. This folded marsupium or pecten, continued from the vascular layer of the choroid through the axis of the eye to the lens, may convey the central nutritious vessels of these humours, or moderate the intensity of the light admitted into the eye, or may assist in adapting the eye to different distances by affecting the position or the form of the lens to which it is attached. From the ciliary liga- ment which unites firmly the choroid to the sclerotic, the large ciliary processes extend freely inwards to form a corona around the margin of the lens ; the ciliary nerves unite to form plexuses at this ciliary ligament, and the retinal expansion of the optic nerve appears to terminate internally at the same place. Plexuses are formed on the ciliary arteries, as in similar delicate organs, before penetrating the delicate textures of the eye to spread on the ciliary processes, the marsupium, and the iris which is here remark- able for the diversities of lively colours which it presents in the different species. From the great mobility of the iris, the round pupil of birds is susceptible of great and rapid changes of dimension, which are very extensive and almost voluntary in the parrots. The optic nerve penetrates the choroid by a lengthened fissure, as in many of the lower animals, and from this lineal perforation the falciform qua- drangular pecten extends forwards through the thin and liquid vitreous humour. The bright coloured and highly moveable iris, with its black uvea, appears sometimes de- tached from the free anterior margin of the choroid, and its coloured surface presents aggregations of minute globules like those of the choroidal pigment. The number of folds in the pecten varies from three or four observed in the goat-sucker to nearly thirty observed in several singing birds. The eyes of birds are moved by the ordinary four straight and two oblique muscles, they are provided with lachrymal glands above and glandulae Harderi beneath as in many reptiles, their conjunctiva forms always a large pellucid and highly elastic membrana nectitans at the inner angle of the eye moved by two distinct muscles, and their lower and upper eye -lids are very perfect, being already provided with tarsal cartilages, Meibomian glands, and even eye-lashes, besides the ordinary muscles for their elevation and de- pression. As some of the mammalia are organized to fly through the air, some to walk on the earth or burrow in the interior, and others to swim through the dark abyss of the ocean, their organs of vision are very differently constructed to adapt them for receiving visual impressions in these different situations. They are generally more spherical in their form and consquently more thin and membranous in their tunics, and better provided with external means of motion and of protection, than in the oviparous classes of vertebrata. They have generally a lateral aspect to give greater extent to the field of vision, but in nocturnal quadrupeds and in quadrumana and man they are directed forwards with more parallel axes to give greater precision and strength to the visual impressions. The eyes are large in most of the lower herbivorous mammalia, as the ruminatia, the rodentia and most of the pachyderma, and also in most of the nocturnal species, as we generally find in other classes ; and they are very small in the adult state of many of the burrowing quadrupeds, as moles and shrews, in the larger pachyderma and cetacea, in the highest mammalia, where their axes are nearly parallel, and in the cheiroptera, where, as in aquatic birds, their deficiency is compensated for by other organs of sense. The same circumstances which modify the form of the eye and the proportions of its refractive parts in other classes of animals affect the organ in this : thus in the visual organ of swimming mammalia we observe many affinities with the eyes of fishes, those of bats approach to those of birds, and intermediate forms are allied to the eyes of reptiles. In cetaceous animals, which constantly reside in the water and receive the rays of light through that dense refractive medium, the eyes have little aqueous humour, the cornea is flat, the crystalline lens is large, dense and spherical, and the vitreous humour is less abundant than in terrestial quadrupeds ; and in order to preserve this flatness of the fore-part of the eye, the sclerotic coat, like that of fishes, is here thick, firm, and elastic, especially over the back and the anterior parts of the eye. The sclerotic is an inch thick at the back part of the eye in the whale. The superior oblique muscle of the eye appears still destitute of a pully for its tendon in the cetacea, these lowest aquatic mammalia, and they are almost in the condition of fishes in the imperfect development of their eye-lids and even of their lachrymal apparatus ; but the smallness of their visual organs compared with those of fishes, accords with the higher development of their in- ternal organs of perception, and their whole nervous system. Many intermediate forms of the organs of vision between those of cetacea and those of land quadrupeds are seen in species which have only semi-aquatic habits, as in walruses, otariae, seals, otters and beavers, where the eye gradually becomes more spherical in form, its coasts around the middle of the eye more thin and membranous, the cornea more convex, the crystalline lens more compressed from before, backwards, and of a softer texture, and the glandular and pro- tecting apparatus of the eye more complicated and more perfect in structure. The large eye of the ruminatia and most other herbivorous quadrupeds accord with the imper- fect development of their intellectual organs, and they often present a greater lateral than vertical extension of the transparent cornea, the pupil, and even of the whole eye-ball, by which the lateral range of vision is extended in these timid and watchful animals during the inclined position of the head. The prominent cornea of carnivorous quadrupeds covers a pupil most frequently ex- tended in a vertical direction which is that most suited to their leaping and predaceous habits, and in the back part of the eye their thick and tough choroid, destitute of the pigment which lines the other parts, shines with a blue or green coloured metallic lustre, a tapetum lucidum which is not seen in the lowest nor in the highest terrestrial animals of this class, and which often presents a red colour, as in albinos, from the exposed vascular layer of the choroid. The ciliary ligament is less and the processes are more de- veloped than in the inferior classes. The iris presents less varied and deep hues than in birds, its free edge, in the em- bryo, supports the membrana pupillaris which closes the pupil as the inter-pulpibral membrane closes the eye-lids at the same period of life, and where the pupil is elongated transversely, as in the horse, the upper free margin of the iris presents pendent processes, as in the cartilagenous fishes, which hang down more or less over the pupil, and sometimes they rise up also from the lower edge. Between the sclerotic and the choroid is a thin brown coloured layer connecting these coats and considered as continuous with the delicate arachnoid covering of the brain and optic nerve, at the ciliary ligament the minute canal of Fontana is still often per- ceptible though less than in birds, and the canal of Petit surrounds the lens between the vitreous and the aqueous humour. The optic nerve penetrates the choroid by a round aperture on the nasal side of the axis of vision ; but in some of the rodentia, as the marmot, it enters by a lineal slit in the choroid, as in birds, and sometimes a rudimentary trans- parent pecten is observed in the embryos of mammalia extending forwards through the vitreous humour, as in the lower oviparous vertebrata. As we ascend through the quadru- manous animals to man, the eye becomes smaller and more spherical, its membranes thinner, the vitreous humour more abundant, the crystalline lens smaller and more compressed, the pupil more circular, the ophthalmic ganglion larger, the retinal surface more extensive, the eyes more approximated and parallel, their orbits more completely surrounded with bone, and the circular suspensory muscle extending forwards from around the optic foramen to the sclerotic in the inclined heads of inferior mammalia, is no longer developed or required for the small eyes and elevated orbits of the quadrumana and man. It is however in the visual apparatus of man (Fig. 105.) organized for seeing in the erect position of the trunk, that we find the most complete protection of the orbits by solid osseous parietes and the most parallel direction of their axes. Shaded externally by the eye-brows which are moved by corrugator muscles, and protected by two highly moveable eye-lids formed by the common integuments which continue thin and transparent, as a conjunctiva, over the fore part of the organ, the human eye presents in form of a plica semi- lunaris, only a small rudiment of the third eye-lid or membrana nictitans so highly developed in most of the inferior vertebrata. The upper eye-lid is now the largest and the most moveable ; both eye-lids are supported by tarsal cartilages, they are provided with long cilia symmetrically formed and disposed, arid with numerous glandular follicles or meibomian glands, which pour out their secretion by minute pores along the inner margins of the eye-lids, and the eye-lid is perforated within by the several ducts pro- ceeding from the lobules of a large lachrymal gland situate in the upper and outer part of the orbit. There are three or four irregular rows of cilia in each eye-lid, which are more numerous and larger in the upper than in the lower, and in- crease in size from the two angles to the middle of the eye-lids, the large upper eye-lid has its proper levator muscle which is not required in the lower, and both are closed by the orbicularis palpebrarum. The glandula Harderi so large in the inferior quadrupeds and birds, where the third eye -lid is fully developed, is here as in the quadrumana reduced to the small follicles of the caruncula lachrymalis, as the great membrana nictitans is now merely a small plica semilunaris at the inner angle of the eye. The lympid fluid from the bilobate lachrymal gland, conveyed by the upper eye-lid over the conjunctiva, passes through the two puncta lachry- malia near the inner angle of the eye, and through the two small lachrymal ducts to their dilated sac and tapering canal from which it is poured by a valvular orifice into the anterior part of the inferior meatus of the nose. The eye-balls, nearly spherical in form, with their axes parallel, and perforated behind by the optic nerves on the nasal side of their axes, are supported on the back part by a large deposit of adipose substance and are moved by four recti and two oblique muscles; the tendon of the superior oblique is not perforated by the rectus su- perior (105. o.) as it is in many feline animals. The muscles are inserted into the white anterior part of the sclerotic, called tunica albuginea, and the optic nerve per- forates a circular cribriform portion of this membrane behind, the central minute aperture of which is occupied by the central artery of the retina which passes through the middle of the optic nerve (105. a.) The transparent cornea, com- posed of homogeneous concentric laminae, thicker and more convex than the sclerotic, has still its transverse diameter a little more extended than its vertical. The choroid is firmly united to the sclerotic at the white ciliary ligament a line in breadth, and is perforated by a circular aperture behind for the transmission of the optic nerve, and from the anterior margin of this ligament proceed the numerous minute folds of the corpus ciliare which give attachment to about seventy ciliary processes (105, /.) extending with their convex margins internally to be united to the capsule of the crystalline lens. The villous internal surface of the vascular layer of the choroid secretes, a layer of variable thickness, of a muscous and viscid pigmentum nigrum this appears to be immediately lined with the delicate transparent membrane of Jacob, within which are the me- dullary and fibrous layers of the retina (105. d.) and the several concentric layers of the hyaloid membrane of the vi- treous humour. The iris, composed chiefly of radiating vessels and nerves disposed in two concentric rings, is attached to the anterior part of the choroid around the ciliary liga- ment, arid divides the cavity for the aqueous humour into two unequal chambers which communicate by the pupil ; it is variously coloured on its anterior surface, and supports on its back-part the uvea which is covered with the black pigment of the choroid. A little exterior to the entrance of the optic nerve a small fold of the retina is observed, and a yellow spot, with a minute round transparent portion of the retina, the uses of which are unknown. The vitreous humour (105.^.), of a gelatinous consistence and contained within the concentric folds of the hyaloid membrane, occu- pies about two-thirds of the axis of the eye, and its delicate membrane embraces also the crystalline lens with its firm capsule and forms around its edge the circular canal of Petit. The crystalline lens, here comparatively small and soft, has its posterior surface as usual more convex than the anterior, and both are most convex at the earliest periods of life. The aqueous humour, enveloped in a delicate capsule, which forms the membrana pupillaris by extending over the pupil in the embryo, occupies a large anterior and a smaller posterior chamber, giving the necessary convexity to the cornea and facilitating the free motions of the iris. Thus we observe these complicated optical instruments, the most universal and the noblest organs of sense, gradually advancing to perfection from the monad to man, where all their internal essential parts, and all their external accessary appa- ratus are the most exquisitely finished and adjusted, and it is chiefly through their means that he is enabled to provide for his wants, to acquire the materials of thought, and to enjoy the sublime spectacle of nature. THIRD SECTION. Organs of Hearing* The organs of hearing are next to those of vision in their importance and in the universality of their occurrence in the animal kingdom, where they are distinctly perceived both in the molluscous and articulated tribes, and they relate to movements of the surrounding element which give notice of objects at a distance. The percussions given by outward bodies to the air or water in which animals reside, are communicated, like undulations of light, to the general surface of their body, and may produce some feeble sensation where there are yet no distinct acoustic instru- ments developed, as light appears to affect many organized beings without eyes. But most of the higher invertebrated animals and all the vertebrata present at the distal expanded soft extremities of distinct auditory nerves, more or less complicated acoustic instruments adapted to receive and transmit sonorous undulations, and to render more distinct the perception of their force, their direction and their ra- pidity of succession. These, like most of the other organs of sense, are disposed symmetrically on the two sides of the head,, and the impression of sound may be communicated to the auditory nerves without passing through the external acoustic apparatus, as by means of the solid parietes of the head, or by direct impression on the nerves from within. From the structure of the organ of hearing it is more adapted for communicating aereal vibrations than those of water, and it is most general and most developed in the air-breathing classes. The sudden percussions communicated by various means to the dense watery element in which most of the lower invertebrata reside, may affect rapidly and powerfully the whole surface of their body, whether naked or covered with hard vibratile parts, and through that means the most sensitive internal parts, without these animals having special acoustic organs to concentrate the undulations and direct them to particular nerves, and we ascend as high as the active-air-breathing insects before we perceive distinct organs appropriated to this sense. Many insects have hard organs for producing audible sounds by their rapid attrition against each other, and these sounds are often heard and repeated by their mates, being a means of communication between the sexes, especially in the darkness of the night. The organ of hearing in insects already presents not only a distinct auditory nerve and vestibule, the first and most essential elements of all this acoustic apparatus, but also the rudi- ments of two semicircular canals, according to the obser- vations of Camparetti on that of the scarabseus and several other genera of insects. At the lower and lateral part of the head there is a minute round passage closed externally by a membrane, and leading on each side of the head to an internal vestibular sac, with two small curved canals ex- tending from it. These vestibular cavities are furnished with distinct nervous filaments, which appear to be branches of the antenneal nerves, and they constitute an acoustic organ which has been observed in many different forms of this class. They are placed more anteriorly on the head of the locusts, where the minute canals are thin, membranous, and transparent, and this organ presents different degrees of development in different species of locusts. Similar audi- tory organs have been detected in the cicada, vespa, libelluke, and at the sides of the base of the long spiral proboscis of the papiliones ; they are perceived also in ants, flies, and other insects belonging almost to every order of this great class. This delicate organ contained entirely within the cranial cavity of insects is provided with a vestibular opening or fenestra ovalis covered with a thin and tense membrane to receive the sonorous undulations of the air and to convey them to the ento-lymph of these membranous cavities, and so to the expanded surface of the surrounding delicate auditory nerves. These organs have been also dissected and described in many insects by Ramdohr, who observed them in the common bee placed near the base of the maxillae. Treviramus found those of the blatta orientalis placed behind the basis of the antennae and closed by an oval, white, concave, vestibular membrane, and Blainville found them in the cicadae, which distinctly hear, on each side of the back part of the head, in form of two minute open stigmata leading to vestibular sacs, but many entomologists, as Straus and Burmeister, are inclined to place the auditory organs of insects in the antennae themselves. In the class of arachnida, which also breathe and reside in air, organs of hearing very similar to those of insects were detected by Camparetti in the spiders, placed near to the mouth at the bases of the palpi and consisting of a vestibular sac covered by a transparent membrane, through which the auditory nerves could be per- ceived. The density of texture and the deep hues of the exterior covering of the head in these air-breathing entomoid classes, and the softness and transparency of the vestibular membrane which receives the sonorous vibrations, render more obvious the position and nature of the organs of hearing in them, than if the whole exterior of the body were covered with a more soft and uniform skin, and it is pro- bably in part from this circumstance that a more simple rudiment of these important organs has not hitherto been observed in the higher forms of helminthoid animals which already present the rudiments of almost all the complex organs of insects. From the thick and solid calcareous covering of the body in the higher Crustacea, their organs of hearing, with their exposed vestibular membrane, are most obvious, especially in the active macrurous decapods, as the lobster and cray-fish, where they present a prominent circular aperture covered with a thin membrane and situate at the bases of the outer pair of antennee. This exterior covering is calcined in some of the brachyurous species, as the maja, and appears to form a loose operculum provided with distinct muscles for its movements. Within this simple vestibular cavity is a white, soft, lengthened sac, or membranous labyrinth, filled with a transparent ento- lymph, and supporting the small fibrils of an acoustic nerve derived from the great supra- oesophageal ganglia. It passes obliquely upwards for a short distance into the first segment of the antennae, and appears to be still destitute of those solid internal lapilli or cretaceous substances which are commonly found in the labyrinths of higher animals. By opening on the lower and not the upper surface of the antennee, the position of its aperture corresponds with the inverted position of nearly all the other organs of these animals. The exterior margins of this vestibular opening, or fenestra ovalis, are often prominent and almost tubular, as in the pagurus, where the covering membrane appears fibrous like the membrana tympani of mammalia. The concealed condition of this organ under a solid calcified covering in the brachyurous species, accords with their more limited powers of swimming, and is analogous to the con- cealed position of the organs of hearing within the cranium of cephalopods and osseous fishes. These organs have a large vestibular membrane in the palinurus, they appear as small tubercles in the palaemon, and in most of the inferior orders of Crustacea no trace of them can be perceived. The slow-moving molluscous animals are less provided with organs for perceiving the properties of outward bodies than the active articulated classes ; but many of the higher pulmonated gasteropods seem both to hear and to smell, although the precise seats of these feelings have not been determined, and the tritonia arborescens emits audible sounds under water, which are, without doubt, intended to be heard by others of the same species, as we see in insects, and probably to serve as a means of communication between these hermaphrodite and almost blind animals, although the organs have not been detected which are appropriated to their perception. The cephalopods which, of all the in- vertebrata, approach the nearest to fishes in their general form, structure and movements, come next to them in the complexriess of their organs of hearing as well as in those of sight. These organs in the cephalopods, as in osseous fishes, are symmetrical and double, placed within the pa- rietes of the cranium, and destitute of external meatus or vestibular membrane. On the sides of the great cephalic cartilage through which the oesophagus passes, and which envelopes the brain, we observe two depressions within the cranial cavity, at its lower part, which are separated by a tough dura mater form the cerebral ganglia. These cavities are separated from each other, and from the exterior mus- cular parts, by the cartilaginous substance of the skull, and they contain each a membraneous sac, or soft labyrinth, which is surrounded by the exterior lymph of Cotunnius, or peri-lymph. The membranous labyrinth on which the acoustic nerves are distributed is filled with a thin ento- lymph, and encloses a solid chalky lapillus, of various forms in different species, composed of carbonate of lime, pre- senting sometimes the appearance of a crystallized rhomboid, and suspended by nervous filaments. Numerous minute blood vessels are seen accompanying the filaments of the acoustic nerves on the parietes of these vestibular sacs. This calcareous substance, like that of the sacculi in the labyrinths of higher animals, serves to communicate more uniformly and distinctly to the accoustic nerves the vibra- tions transmitted to this part of the head, the organs of hearing being here enclosed in the thickest and densest part of the great cephalic curved plate into which the strong muscles of the arms are inserted. In the octopus ven- tricosus, this cretaceous body is conical like a limpet, of a rose-red colour on its round exterior tapering surface, white and hollow on the base which rests on the vestibular membrane, and it is connected, as in higher animals, to the side of the vestibule by numerous nervous filaments. The ento- and peri-acoustic lymph seen here in the vestibule corresponds with that found in the entomoid articulata and in the ears of vertebrated animals, and notwithstanding the magnitude and constancy of the auditory organs in the naked cephalopods, and their presenting the most complex form met with in the invertebrated classes, they are yet reduced almost to the first rudiment or most essential element of the auditory apparatus the vestibular sac with its acoustic nerve. In tracing this organ upwards through the vertebrated classes we find it gradually perfecting the semi-circulajr canals, developing a cochlea from the vestibule, and enveloping the whole of this complex labyrinth within the solid texture of the cranium. It acquires in the air-breathing animals a tympanic cavity communicating with the fauces by the Eustachian tube, and containing ossicula auditus which transmit the vibrations of the membrana tympani to the vestibule and the whole internal labyrinth. And in the highest conditions of the organ a still more exterior meatus auditorius and complicated moveable concha are added to complete this acoustic instrument. Fishes, like the cepha- lopods, receive their auditory sensations through the dense watery element they inhabit, the undulations of which strike forcibly the whole surface of their head and trunk, so that they less require any external means of concentrating sono- rous vibrations or a complicated internal auditory apparatus, than animals which hear through a thin and rare aerial medium. In the lowest cyclostome cartilaginous fishes, as the lamprey, the whole internal ear is nearly in the same condition as in the cephalopods, consisting of a simple shut vestibule, without fenestra ovalis, enclosed in the cartilagi- nous substance of the cranium, without internal calcareous concretions, and even without distinct semi-circular canals, these canals being only represented by three perceptible folds of the vestibular membrane. These two vestibular cavities lodged in the lower and lateral parts of the skull are still separated from the cranial cavity only by the dura mater, and are pierced only by the acoustic nerves and blood vessels which spread on the vestibular membranes, between the peri- and ento-lymph. But in the higher osseous fishes, we find in addition to a highly developed vestibule containing solid calcareous bodies and even sometimes perforated externally by a fenestra ovalis, distinct, large, free, semi-circular canals with considerable ampullae at their terminations, as in other ver- tebrated classes. These parts, however, of the acoustic apparatus are not yet imbedded in or surrounded by the solid bones of the head, but are simply lodged in a de- pression on each side within the general cavity of the skull. There is generally no external fenestra or vestibular opening in osseous fishes, and the sonorous impulses communicated to the body of the animal through the dense medium of the water, are commonly conveyed to the air-sac of the trunk, which is often bifurcated or even ramified, and from that forwards to the base of the skull or into its interior near the ear, and sometimes distinct small costal bones detached from the transverse processes of the anterior vertebrae assist in communicating these vibrations from the air-sac to the organ of hearing. These bones, however, are ordinary ele- ments of the vertebrae, and the air-sac is the rudiment of the lungs and not analogous to the tympanic cavity of air- breathing animals. The great size and length of the semi- circular canals within the cranial cavity of osseous fishes, where they are not yet enclosed within the substance of the temporal bone, corresponds with the great development exter- nally of the tympanic ossicula composing the opercular bones which are likewise unrestrained by any tympanic membrane or osseous walls in their extension outwards. Although in the osseous fishes the whole labyrinth lies in an open groove on each side, entirely within the general cavity of the skull, separated from the brain only by the dura mater, and con- nected only by ligaments with the temporal bone, we find in the sturgeon, an operculated cartilaginous fish, that the labyrinth is already partly buried in the substance of the temporal bone, which envelopes the three semi-circular canals and leaves the vestibule still free within the cavity of the cranium. In the higher forms of cartilaginous fishes, how- ever, in the rays and sharks, the whole labyrinth is at length found to be completely surrounded by the firm elastic car- tilaginous substance of the skull, excepting at the internal entrances of the vessels and nerves and at the fenestra ovalis which now communicates with an external meatus. The external meatus is already seen in some of the osseous fishes, as in the large ears of the lepidoleprus ; in the sharks it is more distinct though closed externally by the skin, and in the rays it is even double on each side as if to form a rudiment of the Eustachian tube, the spiracula of these animals having no relation to the organs of hearing. This imbedded condition of the organ in the cartilaginous fishes better enables them to perceive all the sonorous vibrations com- municated to the soft substance of their skull, and we find the whole internal ear preserve this position, so favourable for receiving vibration, even in the densest forms of the skull, from the cartilaginous fishes up to man. The cre- taceous substances, generally three in number, found within the vestibular succulum and its communicating smaller sacculi, are soft and pulpy in the cartilaginous fishes and of a stony density in those which have an osseous skeleton. They vary in shape according to the species ; they are normal parts of the auditory organ in most animals from the cephalopods to man; they are composed of minute rhomboidal crystals of carbonate of lime and are desti- tute of internal organization like the excreted shells of molluscous animals. The succuli of the vestibule in these lowest forms of the ear appear to form the first rudiment of a cochlea, and a rudiment of the tympanum is seen in the subcutaneous passage destitute of air, leading from the fenestra ovalis to the surface of the head in the highest cartilaginous fishes. The acoustic nerve comes off sepa- rately in fishes from the inferior part of their lobed medulla oblongata beneath the cerebellum, and sends branches to be distributed on the ampullae of the semi-circular canals, on the vestibule, and on the sacculus or the yet undivided and unconvoluted rudiment of the cochlea, so that its branches are most affected by vibrations in these two last cavities by the solid cretaceous bodies they contain, and the vestibule and semi-circular canals are the first parts which become imbedded in the substance of the temporal bone. In some fishes, as the lophius, where the skeleton is of a semi-osseous consistence the canals are already partially imbedded in the substance of the cranial parietes, by their passing round a process of the temporal bone. The perennibranchiate amphibia being, like the fishes, permanent inhabitants of the water, and receiving their so- norous vibrations through that dense medium, are still destitute of a tympanic cavity, and consequently of a Eus- tachian tube, which are parts of the organ first required and first developed in those species which lose their gills and change their aquatic for an aerial element. In these aquatic species the labyrinth is still imperfectly enclosed in a spacious general cavity of the temporal bone, the vestibule communicates externally by the fenestra ovalis, to which the stapes is applied as in all the higher classes of animals, but is here in form of an operculum as in fishes. There is no tympanic cavity or membrane ; the semi-circular canals and the vestibule with its sacculus and lapilli, are formed like those of osseous fishes, but with the sacculus propor- tionably small, and the muscles and integuments still cover the exterior of the organ without leaving a trace of external meatus ; so that the auditory vibrations from without are here obscurely conveyed, as in fishes, through the solid walls of the cranium. The same simple condition of these acoustic organs is seen in the caecilia, and appears to be possessed by the larvae of all the higher caduci-branchiate amphibia. But in the adult state of the frogs and sala- manders we find the semi-circular canals already imbedded in the substance of the temporal bone, and the rest of the labyrinth still free in the original general cavity of that bone, as we observe in the sturgeon among the cartilaginous fishes. The lapilli here form a soft white pulpy calcareous substance, and a small tympanic cavity filled with air, communicating with the fauces, and confining the small united ossicula, is now found between the labyrinth and the skin of the head. The Eustachiaii tubes leading from the tympanum to the fauces, are generally separated throughout, wide, and short, sometimes they unite to open by a single aperture on the median plain as in several frogs and in the pipa, and in some a canal is found prolonged outwards from the fenestra rotunda. The thin and naked skin forms in these air- breathing amphibia a large membrana tympani on a level with the general surface of the head to the centre of which membrane the bent cartilaginous malleus is attached, and from the soft condition of the tympanic ossicula the sonorous vibrations communicated from without to the large expanded membrana tympani are obscurely conveyed to the fenestra ovalis to which the broad base of the stapes is applied. In the air-breathing reptiles the organs of hearing present a higher condition of development than in the semi-aquatic tribes of amphibious animals, especially in the parts which more immediately relate to the rare medium through which their sonorous impressions are received. The tympanic por- tion of the ear is still however so imperfectly developed in the serpents that we find it covered externally not only by the skin and muscles, as in fishes and branchiated amphibia, but also by the hard scales of the head. The three tympanic ossicula are united together into a single piece as in the frogs, which is still cartilaginous at its distal or malleal extremity where it is attached to the inner surface of the membrana tympani. The semi-circular canals, with their ento- and peri-lymph as in fishes and amphibia, are imbedded in the dense petrous portions of their solid temporal bones. The vestibule is still lodged in a capacious cavity of the tem- poral bone, and its sacculus contains a large and solid creta- ceous body, so that the solid lapilli of serpents more resemble those of osseous fishes, while the soft and pulpy cretaceous substances of the labyrinth of amphibia are allied to those of cartilaginous fishes, and they are softer in the chelonian than in the saurian reptiles. The cavity of the tympanum is ge- nerally much larger in the saurian than in the ophidian reptiles, and is covered externally by a thin, projected, trans- parent, naked, membranous continuation of the skin, placed on a level with the general surface of the head, so as yet to present no external auditory meatus. This cavity communi- cates freely with the fauces by a separate Eustachian tube and by means of the fenestra ovalis with the labyrinth, which still presents only a rudimentary undivided cochlea closed externally by the membrane of the fenestra rotunda, and a solid calcareous lapillus as in the serpents. The stapes with its base applied to the fenestra ovalis, continues to be the principal ossiculum ossified in the tympanum, and the tympanic cavity begins to assume a more lengthened tubular form towards its exterior membrane preparatory to the formation of an external auditory meatus and expanded concha to collect and direct the vibra- tions of the air. In some of the saurian reptiles the mem- brana tympani is still covered, as in many serpents, by the ordinary scales of the head, in most it is quite naked and exposed as it is in the frogs and the salamanders, and in the most elevated forms of the sauria it begins to be protected by external overhanging elastic folds of the skin, forming thus a distinct rudimentary concha, as seen in the crocodiles, the gavials, and the alligators. The internal parts of the ear are nearly in the same condition in the chelonian reptiles, which present a more narrow and lengthened tympanic cavity covered externally by the loose integuments of the head, and communicating with the fauces by a wide semi- cartilaginous and distinct Eustachian tube. The three anchilosed tympanic ossicula still constitute a long stiliform bone with its opercular or stapeal piece applied to the fenes- tra ovalis and attached by its outer rounded malleal ex- tremity to the middle of the membrana tympani as in the other orders of reptiles. The vestibule, enveloped with its sacculus and the semi-circular canals, in the substance of the temporal bone, is provided with solid lapilli supported by the filaments of the acoustic nerves, and with a compara- tively large cochlea, though still undivided by an internal lamina and unconvoluted in its form, so that the cochlea appears to be the last part of the internal ear which acquires its normal and perfect form ; but in the crocodilian reptiles it already presents a slightly curved form, and an internal membrane which supports branches of the acoustic nerves and divides it into a scala tympani communicating with the fe- nestra rotunda and a scala vestibuli continuous with the general cavity of the vestibule and membranous labyrinth. Notwithstanding the gelatinous consistence of the ento- lymph which fills the membranous labyrinth of the cold- blooded as well as the higher vertebrata, resembling the vitreous humour of the eye, no cellular tissue or folds of a hyaloid membrane have been observed to pervade its sub- stance, nor in the more abundant and fluid peri-lymph which envelopes these delicate parts and separates them from the solid parietes of the osseous labyrinth. The soft lapilli of the labyrinth of vertebrated animals appear to consist of minute rhomboidal crystals of carbonate of lime like those often found lining the intervertebral foramina in other parts of the vertebral column. The dense bones of the skull of birds closely envelope every portion of their internal ear with a vibratile covering of great hardness, and corresponding with the rare elastic medium they inhabit. The semi-circular canals, so large and free in the cranium of osseous fishes, are here even more reduced in their dimensions than in reptiles, especially in the water birds, but with enlarged ampuke at their ends for the auditory nerves. The vestibule is narrow but more lengthened, and the cochlea has assumed a more curved and spiral form than even in the crocodiles, its spiral partition, formed by two triangular cartilaginous folds extending nearly to its apex, partially divides it into a vestibular and a tympanic portion, communicating with the two foramina of the vestibule and communicating with each other at the apex in the dilated infundibulum or lagena. The cretaceous lapilli so large in the membranous labyrinth of fishes and amphibia are now greatly reduced and appear only in the form of strata of minute calcar- eous crystals. The semi-circular canals are long and narrow in the rapaceous birds, large and wide in the singing birds, and comparatively small, short, and wide in the grallatores, the palmipeds, and the gallinaceous birds. The tympanic cavity, lengthened like the vestibule, has here a short external meatus beyond the projecting convex membrana tympani to which the cartilaginous malleal end of the anchylosed tympanic ossicula is attached. Not only the tympanic cavity is here surrounded by solid bone, but also the short wide Eustachian tubes which sometimes unite together be- fore they open into the posterior nares, and the drum of the ear has its internal dimensions greatly encreased by the nu- merous air-cells of the diploe, over the greater part of the cranium, which now communicate freely with the interior of both tympana. The short external auditory meatus removes the membrana tympani from the level of the general surface of the head, and the exterior concha, the last part of the auditory organ to be developed, presents itself as a simple crescentic fold of the skin extending upwards from the su- perior margin of the external meatus. This rudimentary concha is perceptible in most birds, which can erect or de- press the feathers which bound its upper margin, but it is most developed in the nocturnal predaceous birds, which most require this sense to direct them to their prey in the night. The extent of this crescentic membranous concha is encreased in some of the owls by the long feathers which radiate from around its free margin, and it is raised or depressed at will like a valve or an eye-lid. The solid pa- rietes of the tympanum are pierced by several foramina which lead to the large cells between the two tables of the skull, as those in the tympanum of man and quadrupeds lead to the mastoid cells, and the tympanic cavity is here traversed by the vidian nerve as in mammalia. The cartilaginous malleal portion of the single long tympanic ossiculum divides into three parts where it is attached to the inner surface of the membrana tympani, but in place of the three muscles of the malleus observed in man and quadrupeds, there is here but one long muscle which extends forwards from near the occipital condyle to the exterior end of the malleus. We thus arrive at the most perfect condition of this com- plex acoustic instrument presented by the inammifervus animals, where all its internal essential parts and all its external accessory apparatus have attained their full deve- lopment. The petrous portion of the temporal bone, of great density, embraces closely all the most important in- ternal parts, and the exterior concha for collecting the sonorous vibrations and directing them to the membrana tympani, is generally of great size. The thin membranous labyrinth, highly vascular and of exquisite delicacy, is filled with a fluid ento-lymph enveloping two cretaceous bodies composed of minute calcareous crystals, and analogous to those found in the labyrinth of fishes and even of many in- vertebrated animals. These two cretaceous bodies, nearly of equal size, are contained, one in the large sacculus of the vestibule, and the other in the long elliptical sacculus formed by the meeting of the semi-circular canals near their ampullae, and they are supported by the delicate expanded extremities of distinct branches of the acoustic nerves as in the inferior classes. The membranous labyrinth is surrounded externally with a copious transparent, thin and colourless peri-lymph which separates it from the periosteum, lining the interior parietes of the osseous labyrinth. The membranous semi-circular canals and their ampullae are comparatively slender, their median portion forms the larger part of the broad, short, and irregular vestibule, and its lapillus corres- ponds with the utricular of fishes. The sacculus vestibuli and its lapillus are proportionally small, and the cochlea forms a large turbinated cavity divided longitudinally throughout by an internal solid spiral lamina, forming from two to four spiral turns ; but in the ornithorhyncus it is as simple as in birds. As in the inferior vertebrata the exterior semi-circular canal extends outwards horizontally and at right angles to the other two, and the anterior and posterior unite together to form a common canal before entering the vestibule, their direction being nearly vertical with relation to the floor of the cranium. The nerves of the membranous labyrinth are chiefly confined to the ampullae of the semi- circular canals and to the two sacs containing lapilli, and the two lapilli are proportionally larger in the foetus than in the adult. The osseous spiral lamina dividing longi- tudinally the interior of the convoluted cochlea is still membranous at its peripheral margin, and the scala vestibuli communicates freely with the scala tympani at its dilated apex where it receives a branch of the acoustic nerve, but no nervous brandies are perceived on the membranous semi-cir- cular canals. The two vestibular openings vary much in their form and size in different mammalia, and the aqueducts of the vestibule and cochlea appear connected, the one inter- nally with the dura mater and the other externally with the periosteum. The cochlea is of a narrow lengthened spiral form in many of the rodentia, more short and orbi- cular in the cetacea, and in most of the higher orders of quadrupeds it forms a turbinated cavity with about two turns and a half as in the human ear. The tympanic cavity, im- bedded in the temporal bone, communicating by several aper- tures with the mastoid cells, and by a lengthened ossified Eustachian tube with the fauces, is bounded by a thin fibrous membrana tympani concave externally, and contains four ossicula articulated moveably with each other and provided with distinct muscles for their movements. The external meatus is now increased in length, bounded by ossious walls, defended internally by short hairs and by an acrid secretion from its parietes, and generally terminated ex- ternally by an expanded cartilaginous concha variously formed and developed, which is adapted by its mobility and its conical shape to collect the sonorous vibrations from different directions and to convey them to the internal ear. The concha is generally very small or wanting in the aquatic mammalia. In the cetacea, where the cochlea is often very large and the semi-circular canals comparatively small, we observe only a narrow winding perforation leading out- wards from the membrana tympani to the surface of the head, there is no external concha, and the minute entrance to the meatus is scarcely perceptible on the surface of the skin. The concha is still wanting in the seals and walruses, and is very small in otarise, beavers, otters, and other diving mammalia. It is deficient in the ornithorhyncus, and in several digging animals, as the mole and the manis. The monotrema are also distinguished by several other marks of inferiority in their organs of hearing by which they are allied to birds and reptiles, as the shortness of the external meatus, the anchylosis of the ossicula auditus, the rudi- mentary state of the cochlea, and the free projection of the osseous semi-circular canals into the cavity of the cranium. As we ascend through the tribes of mammalia that live more exclusively upon the land, we find the exterior cartilaginous concha acquiring greater magnitude and symmetry, and, by the articulation of the cartilage and the great development of its muscular apparatus, it acquires the means of more varied and extensive motion. It is largest, most moveable, and, commonly directed backwards, in the timid and feeble rodentia, ruminantia, pachyderma and other herbivorous quadrupeds where the cerebral hemispheres are proportionally small, and it is least and directed forwards in the carni- verous tribes where the brain is large. It is large, however, in the bats and most nocturnal quadrupeds, and we observe it in the quadrumana, especially in gibbons and orangs, gradually acquiring the short, flat, round form and motion- less character of the human concha. The internal ear of man, like that of inferior mammalia, has its membranous labyrinth filled with an ento- lymph and separated by a thin peri-lymph from its osseous parieties. The auditory nerves, as in other vertebrated animals, spread on the ampullae of the semi-circular tubes and supporting the cretaceous lapilli of the median sinus and the succulus, can receive their im- pressions only from the undulations of this fluid medium. The minute component crystals of the two cretaceous lapilli of the vestibule are loosely aggregated together as in the cartilaginous fishes and in all the higher vertebrata, and the membranous labyrinth is separated from the fenestra ovalis by the peri-lymph and by the membrane of that orifice, so that this thin enveloping peri-lymph receives the sonorous vibrations from the tympanum and transmits them to the sensitive parts of the membranous labyrinth. The aqueducts appear to be but vascular foramina. The anterior auditory nerve, accompanied by the facial, passes to the two anterior ampullae and to the cretaceous lapillus of the median sinus, and the posterior auditory branch passes to the posterior ampulla, to the saccular lapillus, and to the cochlea, as in the inferior vertebrated classes. So that there is great uniformity of plan in the structure of this delicate acoustic organ from the simple vestibule of the articulata to its most complex form in the highest mammalia, where the different densities and forms of the pulpy granular lapilli, the gelatinous ento-lymph, and the thin fluid of Cotunnius, regulate and limit each others vi- brations, and approximate the phenomena of hearing to the undulations of light through the various humours of the visual organs. FOURTH SECTION. Organs of Smell. The organs of smell, which are destined to receive and transmit the impressions of odorous particles diffused through the medium in which animals live, are much simpler in their structure, and more difficult to determine, in the in- ferior tribes of animals than those of sight or hearing, and they appear also to be less important for the preservation of life, and less general in their occurrence throughout the animal kingdom. It does not appear that the radiated 'animals have distinct organs to enable them to be sensibly affected by odorous effluvia, but the air-breathing annelides among the articulata have been supposed to perceive them by the parietes of their mouth or by the lateral pores of their air- sacs. The sense of smell so distinctly manifested and so delicate in insects, has also been referred to the same parts of their body, or to their palpi, or to their cesophageal sacs, or to the delicate subdivided laminated extremities of their long flexible antennae, and the inner pair of these organs in the Crustacea have been considered as the seat of the same sense. The labial appendices of the conchifera and other molluscous classes, the entrance of the respiratory sacs in pulmonated gasteropods, the highly sensitive tentacula covered with a delicate mucous mem- brane, and even the whole surface of the skin in the higher mbllusca, have been regarded as the organs through which these animals receive impressions of odorous emanations. The organs of smell, on which the olfactory nerves are entirely distributed, are very obvious in fishes, although they do not communicate with the respiratory organs or with the cavity of the mouth. They are laminated organs placed in cavities or depressions excavated on the anterior part of the face and protected by cartilages as in higher animals, but have yet no posterior opening into the interior of the body on account of the density of the element here respired. The olfactory nerves, arising alone from the rudimentary hemispheres of the brain and provided with large olfactory tubercles, perforate the anterior part of the skull corresponding with the ceribriform plate of the ethmoid bone, and immediately spread upon the numerous parallel or radiating laminae covered with a delicate and extensive mucous membrane. These numerous nasal laminae covered with the petuitary membrane are thus more or less exposed on the surface of the face to the contact of the surrounding element, and a fold of the integuments supported by a cartilaginous plate generally hangs like a valve over the middle of each nasal cavity. The nasal cartilage protecting each cavity partially divides its entrance into two, so that the water passes freely through its interior and over the extensive' surface of the olfactory laminae during the lateral motions of the head and the progressive movements of the body. By the separation of the organs of smell from the respiratory passages in fishes, as in other water-breathing animals, their great sensibility and delicate structure are pro- tected from the violent and incessant action of the currents of water required for respiration. In most osseous fishes there is an anterior contractile and a posterior open or valvular orifice placed superficially apart from each other, and leading into each nostril from the upper part of the muzzle, but in the lampreys both nostrils open by a common orifice on the upper part of the head. In the plagiostome species the wide plicated valvular nostrils open on the under surface of the face anterior to the mouth, and in some of the eels an approach is made to the structure of these parts in the lowest amphibia by having the posterior orifice of their nostril placed internally under the upper lip. In the amphibious animals, where the respiration of air begins to be effected through the nostrils, the olfactory organs become more complicated in structure and more internal in their position. The cartilaginous plicated portion of the organ of fishes now begins to assume the more compact tubular and convoluted form which the osseous plates present in the higher classes of animals, and the sen- sitive surface of the organs increases in extent as we ascend through the vertebrated classes. In the perennibranchiate amphibia the nostrils still form on each side a simple sac, without internal convolutions, and having their posterior opening so far forward in the mouth as to be immediately under the upper lip, as in some fishes. In the larva state of salamanders and frogs the nostrils are still, as in fishes, confined to the exterior of the head, and even in the adult forms of these animals the posterior openings of the nostrils, though within the cavity of the mouth, are much advanced in their position, and distant from the median line of the body. The exterior nares which are muscular and contrac- tile, have now almost lost the cartilaginous valve of the fishes, but the turbinated bones even in a cartilaginous form, scarcely yet extend the interior surface of the organ, and the cavities of the nostrils in the proteus are still laminated as in a fish, although they open posteriorly under the upper lip. In the serpents the organs of smell have their internal surface extended by the rudimentary turbinated bones, and by enlarged nasal cavities which open posteriorly both by a common orifice on the median plain, near the anterior part of the palate. These cavities are increased in the sauria where the turbinated bones begin to be strengthened by ossific matter and to assume a more convoluted form. They extend from the point of the muzzle nearly along the whole head, separated by the vomer, in the alligators, gavials and crocodiles, where they generally open externally by expanded, contractile, valvular sacs, as in many cetacea. The anterior and posterior openings of the nares, in the saurian reptiles, are wider than in the ophidia, the whole organs are situate more internally and are more protected by the expanded nasal bones. The whole organs of smell are still more covered and concealed by the osseous walls in the consolidated head of the chelonian reptiles, where the olfactory surface is encreased in extent, the anterior nares are very small, and the posterior openings are placed further backward from their primitive anterior position in the inferior vertebrata. The olfactory nerves and the whole internal organs of smell are comparatively small in birds, and their imperfect development of this sense is compensated for by their high powers of vision, which is better adapted for their active life and the great distances at which they generally require to distinguish their food. The exterior openings of the nostrils are generally large and oblique for the more free respiration required during their rapid movements; they perforate the horny mandible or the cere, or the feathered skin, and the various forms and positions of these exterior openings present useful characters for the distinction of species in this class. There is commonly a nasal gland of considerable size in or near each orbit. The cartilaginous alae of the nose are seldom moveable or prolonged, the septum is often more deficient below than that between the orbits, and the posterior nares, prolonged backward to near the glottis, often terminate by a single opening covered with protecting papillae. The turbinated bones are larger than in reptiles, and the convoluted portion of the ethmoid, though they are still but partially ossified, and the olfactory nerves pass from their long ethmoidal tubes, through the back part of the orbits, into the convoluted plate of the ethmoid. These convoluted parts for the highly vascular petuitary membrane, and corresponding in magnitude with that of the olfactory nerves of birds, are for the most part still cartilaginous and very limited in their extent, and the imperfect development of this organ is often compensated for by the extensive distribution of the fifth pair of nerves on the upper and lower jaws, as in many aquatic species which seek their food in mud. All the internal parts of the organs of smell become more complex and elaborate in the mammiferous animals, new and enlarged cavities open into their interior, as the frontal, maxillary, and sphenoidal sinuses, the large nasal glands of birds are here reduced to follicles, and the exterior nares assume a more lengthened and expanded form than in the oviparous classes. The large olfactory nerves here pene- trate the numerous openings of a broad cribriform ethmoidal plate, excepting in the cetacea, arid spread over the very extensive surface of the convoluted cellular part of the ethmoid, and the two turbinated bones on each side. The turbinated bones are most lengthened and simple in form in the long-muzzled ruminantia, pachyderma, and other herbivorous quadrupeds, where the various communicating sinuses are largest, arxl these bones form the most com- plicated labyrinths in the short-muzzled carnivora, where the sense of smell is most acute, and by which they pursue their prey through all their windings and concealments, or seek them by night. The exterior openings of the nostrils are valvular in the beavers, seals, and other diving quadru- peds, to protect them during their rapid movements through that dense element ; they are almost as valvular in the camels and dromedaries for the sands of the desert, and in many scraping and burrowing quadrupeds, and they are prolonged in many cetacea into wide valvular and contractile sacs, which enable them, like the crocodiles, to breathe freely with every other part of their body concealed under the surface of the water. The nostrils terminate in vertical foliated membranous expansions in the phyllostoma and many other bats, and in fimbriated radiating margins in the condylura ; they form the digging instruments in the hog tribe ; they are long and flexible in the nasua, more muscular, prolonged, and mobile in the tapir, expanded into a bottle- shaped cavity in the cystophora, and most extended in the elephant where they serve as organs of prehension both for fluid and solid food. Where the cerebral hemispheres in this class are largest, the olfactory, like most of the other sensorial organs, are comparatively small, as in the quadru- mana and man, and they are proportionally large in the human foetus and in the negro, as in the inferior orders of mammalia. FIFTH SECTION. Organs of Taste. The organs of taste are situate in the mucous membrane of the mouth, especially in the papillae and calyces of the tongue, and are adapted to convey a knowledge of many properties of sapid bodies applied to these parts ; so that, as the organs of smell watch over the respiratory organs and the properties of the surrounding element, those of taste are situate at the entrance of the digestive apparatus where they can best examine the materials to be conveyed into the alimentary canal. According to the extent and delicacy of these parts of the mouth, and their supply of blood vessels and nerves, the sense of taste appears to be de- veloped in animals, and the gratification of this sense forms an incentive towards supplying the necessary wants of the body. Although these organs appropriated to our sense of taste are more rarely met with in the inferior animals than the organs of the former senses, it is difficult to conceive animals with a mouth and stomach without supposing that they derive some sensations of taste from the substances they introduce as food into these cavities, and such sensations have been ascribed even to the polygastric animalcules, from their apparent selection of proper food, and their rejecting hurtful substances. Where delicate buccal organs, of doubtful function, are directly applied to the food in the lowest tribes of animals, it may be inferred that they communicate some impressions of this kind, as the prominent lips of many polypi and acalepha, the minute tubular organs around the mouth of ophiurae, asteriae, spatangi, arid most other echino- derma, and the tongue and lips of most articulated and molluscous animals. Notwithstanding the shortness and density of the tongue, and the horny prehensile or masti- cating organs which often cover its surface in higher classes, we can perceive distinct gustatory villi on that of the ce- phalopods and the cold-blooded vertebrata, which are suc- ceeded by larger papillae and calyces in the birds and mammalia. These highly vascular and sensitive papillae which terminate the gustatory filaments of the fifth pair of nerves gradually assume the arrangement and forms which they present on the human tongue as we ascend through the quadrumana to man. SIXTH SECTION. Organs of Touch. The most general sense in animals is that of touch, of which all the others may be mere modifications, and it is situate in the highly vascular and sensitive surface of the skin which covers and protects the entire machine. This general sense relates to the most common physical properties of bodies, as their form, their consistence and their tem- perature, without some perception of which animals could scarcely provide for their own subsistence or the con- tinuance of their race. It constitutes the simplest form of an organ of sense, where the minute cutaneous vascular papillae are scarcely yet apparent, which form by their development on the ends of sensitive nerves the more com- plicated organs of the higher senses ; and the contact of the outward object, required in all, is most obvious in this sense. As the sensitive surface of the skin, the vascular layer of the corium, exudes upon its exterior an insensible and extra-vascular cuticle and rete mucosum, which vary much in their thickness, and in the nature and quantity of the materials which often consolidate them, the effect of external impressions in exciting perceptions of touch must chiefly depend on the structure and sensibility of the parts touched and on the general condition of the nervous system in animals. Those invertebrated animals therefore, of each class, which have their exterior naked and soft, will have a more general and acute sense of touch than such allied forms as have their bodies covered with dense substances, although in the latter animals the higher development of the other organs of sense may compensate for the deficiency, and enable them amply to provide for all their wants. The naked surface and long cilia, almost developed into ten- tacula, of most polygastric animalcules, the long sensitive tentacula of most zoophytes and acalepha, and the fleshy tubular feet of higher radiated animals, are the parts most adapted to receive impressions of this kind, although we perceive no distinct organs in these animals appropriated solely to the sense of touch. These sensitive organs con- tinue soft in the helmmthoid articulata, but become con- solidated and jointed in the entomoid classes where they constitute the various forms of palpi and antennae. There is one pair of these antennae in the myriapods as in most of the annelides, and the same number is seen in the insects, but they are deficient in the arachnida, and two pairs are found in the Crustacea where they are generally more ex- tended than in insects. In the molluscous classes they again assume the soft, sensitive and fleshy condition of tentacula, destitute of articulations, as we observe around the orifices of the respiratory sac in unicated animals, and around these orifices and the margins of the mantle in conchifera. In the gasteropods there are commonly two of these ten- tacula, as seen in the cyprcea erosa, (Fio. 106. c. c. 9 ) they extend from the sides of the neck or the mouth, (106. b.,) supporting the eyes (106. d. d. } ) near their base, and are often surmounted by the ciliated syphon (106. a.) for the passage of water to the respiratory organs. The muscular foot (106. e.) pos- sesses exquisite sensibility ; there is frequently a second pair of tentacula at the sides of the mouth, and numerous fleshy extensions, simple or ramified (106. /.), are often seen prolonged from the sides or the general surface, of the mantle. Similar fleshy cephalic tentacula are seen in the pteropods, and the whole surface of the body is exquisitely sensitive in the naked cephalopods where the flexibility of the long arms and tentacula will enable them to obtain more accurate perceptions of the forms and di- mensions of outward objects. Among the vertebrata, as in the inferior classes, many animals are covered externally with hard and insensible parts which must greatly obscure their impressions of touch derived from the contact of surrounding objects. The large solid calcareous scales of many fishes, the smaller horny scales of most ophidian and saurian reptiles, the large plates of crocodilian and chelonian reptiles, the compact and dense plumage of birds, the thick hides or shaggy furs of many quadrupeds, and the long spines or broad horny scales of others, must act like the insensible sheaths of many radiated, articulated, and molluscous animals, in shielding their skin from impressions of touch. Many fishes have the scales so minute that their body, with relation to touch, is almost as naked and sensitive as that of the amphibia above them ; others have only the lower surface of their body or the periphery of their mouth covered with a naked and sensitive skin to compensate for the want of adaptation of the arm and hands to the sense of touch, and in many species of fishes the tentacula of the in- ferior classes are still seen in the form of fleshy filaments around or near the mouth. The long divided exsertile tongue of serpents and the worm-like flexibility of their trunk compensate for the want of hands as organs of touch. The flexible prehensile tails of many climbing saurian and mammiferous animals, the palmated feet and sensitive lips of many aquatic birds and mammalia, and the delicate ex- posed skin, the extended labial bristles, the long flexible tongue or lips, or the extended proboscis of many quadru- peds, contribute to extend this sense. The osseous foramina for the branches of the fifth pair, even in animals now extinct, enable us to judge of the development of these parts relating to the sense of touch. But, from the cold-blooded amphibious animals through all the higher forms of ter- restrial vertebrata, we observe the hands to become more exquisitely organized and more fitted for communicating delicate impressions of the forms, dimensions, temperature, consistence, and other physical properties of external bodies. The almost naked skin of apodal anguilliform fishes, and the great flexibility of their trunk, compensate, as in the per- eimibranchiate amphibia and in the cetacea, for the imper- fect development of their members as tactile organs, and many fishes possess tentacular filaments of great sensibility, and often very numerous near the mouth, as the sturgeons, the silurus, the cod, and the lophius where they extend also from along the sides of the body. The clawless feet, the naked and delicate skin, and the broad fleshy tongue and lips of the caducibranchiate amphibia greatly extend their means of receiving impressions of touch ; and the long forked tongue of serpents, during their intercourse with each other, and during their progressive movements, is constantly darted out and retracted, and employed as an organ of touch, like the antennae and palpi of insects under similar circum- stances. The soft webbed feet and partly clawless toes of the crocodilian reptiles, and their broad fleshy tongue and lips, compensate for the diminished sensibility produced by the large ossious plates and horny scales covering the greater part of their body, and enable them better to feel their prey under the dark and muddy waters they inhabit. The broad digital expansions of geckos and phylluri, the soft fleshy feet and thin cutaneous coverings of the chamseleons, the iguanas, the lizards, and other climbing sauria, and the broad intercostal membranes of the dragons, contribute also to ex- tend their sense of touch. As in all other aquatic animals, it is chiefly among the aquatic forms of birds and mammalia that we observe the naked and soft condition of the skin most conducive to its sensibility, and the most extensive develop- ment of this delicate organ of touch especially between the digital phalanges, and the tentacular developments of the invertebrata so often seen in the fishes, are still observed in various fleshy prolongations from the face of birds, and even of some quadrupeds as the condylura. It is, however, chiefly in the long divided hands of carnivora, quadrumana, and all the hightr forms of quadrupeds that we find the organs of touch acquire their most appropriate and exquisite structure. And in proportion to the high nervous development and that of the sensitive cutaneous papillee, to the sensibility, the vascularity, the flexibility and the softness of the fingers, the hands and other cutaneous parts, this most general sense of touch, so closely allied to common nervous sen- sibility, encreases in power and extent as we ascend to man, who surpasses all other animals in the exquisite and equal development of all his organs of sense, and in the perfection of all those higher organs of relation by which animals are more immediately connected with surrounding nature. 