'On the Life and Writings of Baron Cuvier' (1830) ALTHOUGH the study of Zoology is far from having yetacquired in Britain that scientific character which it haslong held on the continent, there is obviously an increasing tastefor the study of that interesting science, and a more generalperception of its utility, since the exertions of the late Sir T.Stamford Raffles in its behalf. The zoological treasures im-ported from the East by that zealous patron of the science haveenriched our previously existing collections and formed thenuclei of new museums, and his influence has extended to theestablishment of new societies, menageries, and journals devotedto the advancement of Zoology. The Zoological Society ofLondon, though instituted only four years ago, is already oneof the most numerous and respectable scientific societies ofGreat Britain, and the study of Zoology has recently begun tobe placed on an equal footing with Mineralogy and Botany inthe universities of England. We anticipate that the taste thusrecently excited for the study in this country, will not be allowedto evaporate in mere admiration; but that, in imitation of ourcontinental neighbours, it will be improved, and directed to theproper means of advancing the interests of the science. In themean time if we wish to view the study of animated nature ina form truly worthy of occupying a philosophic mind, we mustdirect our attention to the French school, where it has longformed a regular branch of academic education, and the exclusivesubject of study of men of distinguished abilities and learning,and by no one has the science been more successfully cultivatedthan by the eminent author of the voluminous works announcedat the head of this article.In attempting to lay before our readers a brief and impartialsketch of the scientific labours of M. Cuvier, we shall follow thechronological order of his numerous writings, that we may beenabled to trace the progress of zoological discovery during thelast forty years, at the same time that we examine the merits ofthe successive changes this distinguished naturalist has intro-duced into the science. Within the period of M. Cuvier's careerall the branches of Natural History have been cultivated withincreased ardour in the schools of Europe, and our acquaintancewith the natural productions of the globe has been greatlyextended by the rapid progress of geographical discovery, bythe advancement of all the collateral sciences, and by thezeal and intelligence of European colonists and travellers indistant countries. The liberal aid afforded to science by theFrench government, and the consequent subdivision of mentallabour among its cultivators in that country, have enabled thescientific of France to maintain an ascendency over othercountries of Europe in those departments which necessarilyrequired such aid for their successful cultivation, and particu-larly in Zoology, one of the most expensive of all the physicalsciences.The Menagerie of the Jardin du Roi and the Museums ofNatural History and Comparative Anatomy at Paris, which havegrown for more than a century, have long surpassed those ofevery other) country of Europe in their extent, elegance, andrichness; and, in the extensive means of comparison whichthey thus present, they afford an instrument of investigationin the study of Natural History, superior to that enjoyed byany other country. These magnificent collections, which owemuch much to the early exertions of Buffon and Daubenton, havebeen a means of spreading a taste for the study of Zoologyand Comparative Anatomy, and have greatly contributed to theeminent success of the cultivators of these sciences in France.The labours of M. Cuvier in these departments have extendedover a period of nearly forty years, they have greatly added tothe reputation of the French school of naturalists, and they havebeen a principal means of the rapid advancement of the study ofAnimated Nature in our times. His comprehensive genius hasshed its lustre over every department of this vast field of in-quiry ; the existing races of the animal kingdom he has reviewed,classified, and defined ; their diversified structures he has exa-mined and described ; numerous tribes of the extinct species havealmost been recalled to life by his skill and perseverance; andat the age of sixty his active and vigorous mind still continueswith unabated ardour to explore new paths in that immense fieldof investigation, which he has so long cultivated with unrivalledsuccess.George Cuvier was born in the year 1769, at Montbeliard, atown now in the department of France, called the Upper Rhine,but which, at the period of his birth, belonged to Wurtemberg,one of the states of Germany. This town, on the confines ofGermany, has at least the glory of having given birth to thetwo illustrious Cuviers, to M. Duvernoy, the present Professorof Natural History atStrasburg, and to M. Laurillard, the ableassistant of M. Cuvier in the department of ComparativeAnatomy. M. Cuvier was born in the same year, in the samemonth, and nearly on the same day with Napoleon, whoseintimacy he enjoyed during a great part of his perilous career;and thus, in very distant parts, the same period gave birthto the two illustrious foreigners whose lives must be so muchidentified with the history of France, and whose thoughtsand actions have had so great an influence on the scientificand political world in later times. His father was an officerin a Swiss regiment in the service of France, and Chevalierof the Order of Military Merit; he retired after forty years'service, with a moderate pension from France, and some timeafter he was made Commandant of Artillery at Montbeliard.Cuvier received the early part of his education at theUniversity of Stuttgard, the capital of Wurtemberg, wherehe resided for several years, directing his attention to thestudy of Mathematics, Philosophy, Law, and Jurisprudence,with the view of qualifying himself for taking a share in theadministration of his native country, to which he was inducedto look forward by the kind patronage shewn him by the lateDuke Charles, grand uncle of the present King of Wurtemberg.These early prospects of Cuvier, however, were soon blastedby the events which agitated France towards the close of thelast century, and by which his native country became a part ofa French province. The grand displays of natural scenery inthe mountainous country around Stuttgard, form an allurementto the study of Natural History; and there have long existedboth museums and societies in that capital devoted to itsadvancement. On leaving the University of Stuttgard, Cuvierbetook himself to France, where he resided for some time onthe coast of Normandy, and afterwards resorted to Paris. Herehe commenced his career as a private lecturer, and was soonappointed to assist Professor Mertrud, in the Course of Com-parative Anatomy delivered in the Museum of Natural History.Cuvier had already made himself favourably known to severalof the most eminent naturalists of Paris, by his new andinteresting observations on the structure of molluscous animals,made while residing on the coast of France, as tutor in thefamily of a nobleman. His zeal and abilities were soon recog-nized ; he was admitted a member of most of the learnedsocieties of Paris, and before the age of twenty-nine he wasappointed Professor of Natural History in the Central Schoolof the Pantheon. His election as a member of the Instituteof France, on the first organization of that assembly in l/96,gave a new impulse to his exertions; and the numerousmemoirs and discoveries which he laid before that learnedbody in the early part of his career, greatly extended hisreputation, while they formed the bases of his more enlargedsucceeding publications. The structure of the animal frame, inall the modifications it presents throughout the lower classes,was always the favourite subject of his pursuits ; and he conti-nued to discharge the duties of Professor of Comparative Anatomyin the Garden of Plants to a late period, notwithstanding themultiplicity of his other avocations. The drawings which ac-companied his numerous anatomical memoirs were all executedby himself, and the beauty and elegance of his delineations arenot less remarkable than the minuteness and accuracy of hisdescriptions. Most of these memoirs are published in theAnnales du Museum.The labours of Daubenton, Mertrud, and Rousseau hadalready greatly extended the Museum of Comparative Ana-tomy before the task of completing it fell to M. Cuvier, by hisappointment to that chair in the Garden of Plants. While hewas Professor of Natural History in the Pautheon, and deliveredlectures on Comparative Anatomy, for Mertrud, in theGarden of Plants, he published his first separate work, theTableau Elemental, in 1798. This work forms an octavovolume of 710 pages, it presented a new distribution of thewhole animal kingdom, and it formed the basis of the two suc-ceeding editions of the Regne Animal. The principles ofclassiBcation, adopted in this early publication, had alreadybeen partly developed by him in a separate memoir on a nesedivision of white-blooded animals, which he published at theage of twenty-six, three years before the appearance of theTableau Elementaire. In that early memoir, which was readto the Natural History Society of Paris on the 10th of May,1795, and printed in the Decade Philosophique, Cuvier firstattacked Linnffius's division of the invertebrata into insects andworms, and assigned the characters and limits of the newclasses mollusca, Crustacea, insecta, vermes, echinodermata andzoophyta. The distribution of these invertebrate classes intothree great divisions equal to the vertebrata, was afterwardsestablished by Cuvier in a memoir read to the Institutein July, 1812. The classification of animals is one of theprincipal objects to which the researches both of the zoologistand comparative anatomist are directed: without the assist-ance derived from methodical arrangement, the multitudeand variety of objects belonging to the animal kingdomwould continually impede our investigations, and overpowerthe strongest mind. The efforts of M. Cuvier were, therefore,early directed to this important point; and the publication justmentioned is an outline of the course of lectures delivered byhim at the Pantheon, on this subject, in 1797- The animalkingdom is there divided into eight great classes : four of verte-brate animals, Mammalia, Aves, Reptilia, Pisces; and fourof invertebrate animals, 3Iollusca, Insecta, Vermes, Zoophyta;the orders, genera, and many of the species of which areillustrated by ample details, and the characters of all the dif-ferent groups are illustrated by fourteen plates, from his ownpencil, representing more than a hundred objects. This workhas not been translated into English, but a Portuguese transla-tion of it, by Almeida, was published in London in 1815, in2 vols. 8vo.After some interesting observations on the utility of the studyof Zoology, and its applications to other sciences, he detailsthe properties which distinguish organized and sentient beings,and gives an outline of the organization of the human bodyand the distinctions among the different races of mankind. Intreating of the mammalia he has somewhat improved theclassification of Professor Storr of Tubingen; lie has adoptedthe nomenclature of Linnaeus, but he has greatly improved thecharacters of the genera and species, by introducing more pre-cise and detailed descriptions of the teeth, taken from theskeletons preserved in the National Museum. The arrange-ment of the class of birds has been taken from Linnaeus andBuffon, and the descriptions are short and perspicuous. Fromthe limited means of observation which Cuvier then possessedwith regard to birds, he considers this the most imperfect partof the volume. The class of reptiles is divided into twoorders, oviparous quadrupeds, and serpents, the former com-prehending the chelonia, sauria, and batrackia of Brogniartand the later editions of the Regne Animal, and the latterorder comprehending the ophidia. The divisions of the class offishes are adopted from Linnaeus; they consist of six orders,founded on the position of the fins, and Blumenbach had pre-viously copied the same arrangement into his ' Manual ofNatural History.' The cartilaginous fishes, which are placedfirst in the work of Blumenbach, and in the Tableau Elemen-taire, the Lecons d'Anatomie Comparee, and likewise in theRegne Animal of 1817, have been properly thrown to the bottomof the class in the great work on the Natural History of Fishes(1828), and in the new edition of the Regne Animal (1829), asin their skeleton and other parts of their organization theyapproach to the molluscous animals. The whole of the inverte-brate animals are distributed into three great groups, whichcorrespond with the mollusca, articulata, and zoophyta of theRegne Animal. The animals of the first division, mollusca, arecharacterized as having a muscular heart, and no longitudinal,knotted, nervous cord; those of the second division, insectsand worms, have a longitudinal dorsal vessel, and a knottedspinal cord, or at least one of these two characters; thoseof the third division, zoophyta, have neither heart, nor brain,nor nerves. The mollusca are divided into the cephalopoda,gasteropoda nuda, gasteropoda testacea, and acephala; thelast' of these divisions comprehending Lamarck's classes,conchifera, tunicata, and cirrhipeda. His next great divisionhe terms insects and worms, and comprehends under itall the Crustacea, arachnida, insecta, annelida, and entozoa oflater authors. The arrangement of these is taken chiefly fromLinnaeus and Fabricius, and he was as fortunate in having thepersonal assistance of Fabricius in regard to this class, as hehad been in obtaining that of Lacepede for the classes of rep-tiles and fishes, and that of Lamarck for the testaceous molluscaand the corals. Cuvier, however, has paid a minuter attentionto the organs of manducation of insects in this work than hadbeen done by his predecessors, and has pointed out many im-portant characters founded on these parts. The division of hisgreat group zoophyta is nearly the same as that of the RegneAnimal, with the exception of the entozoa, being placed amongthe vermes in the Tableau Elementaire, and the infusoria beingplaced between the acalepha and the true ramified zoophyteswhich terminate the volume.Throughout the whole of this Elementary Treatise he dis-plays a practical acquaintance with the objects about which hetreats, and with the best authors who had preceded him. Thegeneral observations prefixed to each division are judicious andappropriate, and, considering the state of the science at thattime, they contain much interesting and original information ;but, in his desire to adapt the work to the capacity of hispupils, he has overlooked the advantages of the strict methodi-cal disposition of materials, so conspicuous in the great masterswhom he has followed. The great zoological distinctions ofclasses, orders, genera, &c, are supplied by Cuvier by themore convenient division of chapters, and the reader is some-times left to guess the value of a subdivision by the size of thetype employed in printing its description. The investigationsand the extent of reading necessary for the composition of awork like this, designed to exhibit a summary of the wholeanimal kingdom, must have greatly aided M. Cuvier in hisdemonstrations of comparative anatomy; and the combinationof his duties at the Pantheon and at the College of France, withthose at the Garden of Plants, may be considered as a principalcause of his eminent success in both the departments ofzoology and comparative anatomy. Where the latter branchis studied only in connexion with human anatomy, the know-ledge acquired is generally limited to a superficial acquaintancewith a few of the classes most nearly resembling man ; andwhen studied only in connexion with geology, the acquaintancewith it is generally limited to those hard parts of animalscapable of being preserved in the strata of the earth. Andwhere Zoology is cultivated without the aid of ComparativeAnatomy, the true principles of classification must be over-looked, and the most discordant arrangements will result fromthe attention being directed exclusively to external form.From the wide range of M. Cuvier's investigations and publicduties, he was often obliged to pass from the beaten path of hispredecessors in treating of the anatomy of animals, and totravel over ground which had been but little explored. Thetracks pointed out by Pallas, Camper, Vicq-d'Azir, and Dau-benton, were too common to engage his attention; and hefound, in the obscure paths followed by Swammerdam, Lister,Basterus, and Reaumur, materials more calculated to extendthe principles of physiology, to enlarge the views of theanatomist, and to advance the science of zoology, than by con-fining his inquiries to the vertebrate classes. By his interest-ing researches regarding the mollusca, while residing in thesouth of France, he became known to Lametherie, Tessier,Olivier, Lacepede, Geoffroy, and Millin, who invited him tocome to Paris, and obtained for him the chair of Zoology in thePantheon. His earliest anatomical memoirs read before theInstitute of France, were on animals the most remote fromman. His memoir on the Medusae pointed out, in animals twofeet in diameter, a structure nearly as simple as that of theInfusoria. The numerous memoirs which he published in theAnnates du Museum on the Anatomy of Molluscous Animals,fill alone a quarto volume of nearly 500 pages : they containdescriptions of the structure of nearly fifty genera, and areillustrated by thirty-five elaborate plates from his own pencil.These memoirs have rectified many of the errors or suppliedthe deficiencies of preceding observers, and have thrown a newlight on the most remarkable and unknown forms of organiza-tion : they have pointed out the true relations of these diversi-fied beings to each other; and, by affording the means of divid-ing them into natural and closely allied groups, they havegreatly facilitated the labours of the conchologist. He hasminutely detailed the anatomy of most of the known Cephalo-podous and Pteropodous mollusca, and of numerous genera ofnaked and testaceous Gasteropoda. His memoirs on the Ascidiaand other Acephalous Mollusca have been the means of illustrat-ing the whole class of tunicated animals: his memoir on theCirrhipeda has established the true relations of these singularanimals, in pointing out their numerous affinities with otherarticulated animals in their nervous system, their respiratoryorgans, and their articulated extremities; and his concludingdissertation on the species of Crustacea known to the ancients,displays a happy union of extensive zoological knowledge withprofound classical erudition.A career of original investigation, like that of M. Cuvier, illaccords with the patience and labour required in extensive com-pilations; and although an elementary work on his favourite sub-ject of Comparative Anatomy, was still a desideratum in France,he was too much impressed with the difficulty of the under-taking, and too eagerly engaged in a new train of investigation,to undertake the composition of such a work. Fortunately forthe science, M. Cuvier found two able anatomists eager andqualified to reduce, to the form of a system, the vast materialsemployed by him in his courses of lectures on ComparativeAnatomy. M. Mertrud had been appointed to the newlycreated chair of Comparative Anatomy in the Garden of Plants,but from his advanced age at that time, he was induced by theadvice of his colleagues to appoint Cuvier as his substitute,and in that capacity Cuvier devoted himself to the extensionof the Zootomical Museum, and to the means of illustratinghis lectures, which were then attended by numerous assemblies.On the death of Mertrud, who had been long assistant toDaubenton, Cuvier succeeded him as Professor of ComparativeAnatomy on the 1st of November, 1802. M. Dumeril, whoaccomplished the two first volumes of the Lecons d'AnatomieCompared, comprehending the Organs of Motion and those ofSensation, was then at the head of the anatomical departmentof the School of Medicine at Paris ; and the composer of thethree last volumes, treating chiefly of the Organs of Digestion,Circulation, Respiration, Secretion', and Generation, was Dr.Duvernoy, a relation of M. Cuvier, a young and zealousanatomist, and now the distinguished Professor of NaturalHistory at Strasburg. M. Cuvier's attention was at thistime directed to the excavations in the gypsum strata ofMontmartre; and his frequent excursions to that interestingtheatre of geological events, together with the labour of com-paring the accumulations of bones daily extracted from thequarries with those of the skeletons preserved in the cabinet,must have considerably distracted his attention from the com-pilation of the Lecons d'Anatomie Compared, and left a largeshare of the merit of these volumes to the skilful anatomistswho conducted them. The first volume of the work is prefacedby a letter of twenty-two pages from Cuvier to his zealouspreceptor, Professor Mertrud; in which he explains, with hisusual eloquence and perspicuity, the nature of the subject, theparticular scope of the work, and the manner in which it wasgot up, from his oral demonstrations. The work is in fiveoctavo volumes, of about 500 pages each : it is illustrated byfifty-two engraved plates; and, although it is now thirty yearssince it was published, it still forms the most perspicuous,correct, and complete systematic view of the science whichexists in any language. In collecting materials for the work,Cuvier was aided by many donations of specimens from hisfriends and correspondents in distant parts: he had liberty todissect all the animals which died in the Menagerie, and evento open those rare species which had long been preserved inthe Museum in spirits. Cuvier and his pupils dissected, in1802, the large male elephant which had been pillaged, alongwith many other zoological treasures, from the Stathouder inHolland, during the Revolution; he dissected another maleelephant in 1804, and a female elephant a few years afterwards.His younger brother, M. Frederick Cuvier, was appointedkeeper of the Menagerie in 1805, and rendered Cuvier greatassistance in completing the series of skeletons of the Museumof Comparative Anatomy, which was first opened to publicinspection in 1806. Manuscript copies of M. Cuvier's lectureson Comparative Anatomy, taken by pupils from his oral demon-strations, had been circulated in Paris, and even cited in works,before he undertook to publish them in a complete and con-nected form; and M. Dumeril had taken regular and amplenotes from these demonstrations during four successive years.The introductory lecture is full of original and highly interestingviews of the animal economy, and of the laws of organization ;the succeeding lectures of the first volume, on the Organs ofMotion, treat of the osseous and muscular system of eachdivision of the body, commencing with the bones and musclesof the trunk, those of the shoulder and anterior extremity;then those of the pelvis and posterior extremity are described,in all the classes of vertebrate animals. The organs of motionin invertebrate animals are then examined ; and the first volumeconcludes with a lecture on the organs of motion considered ina state of action. Although it is convenient sometimes, inteaching osteology, to exhibit the organs by which the variousmotions of the bones are effected, the introduction of theinteresting details of myology is apt to fix the attention tooexclusively on individual forms, and to carry away the mindfrom those extensive comparisons which are required to illus-trate the osteology of the lower animals; and M. Cuvier hasnot been followed by succeeding writers, in thus combining theosteology with the myology. The second volume commenceswith the description of the head, considered as the receptacleof the principal organs of sense; the brain and nerves are thenconsidered; and the organs of sight, hearing, touch, smell,and taste, are examined at great length.A period of five years elapsed between the publication of thefirst two volumes of the Lecons and the succeeding three;during which time M. Cuvier was elected Perpetual Secretaryof the French Institute, an office which his genius, learning,and indefatigable research still continue to adorn. Cuvier wasSecretary of the Institute so early as 1800, when that office was onlytemporary and of two years duration; he had been the third elected since the beginning of the Institute. At this time Napoleon, returned from Egypt and declared" First Consul,was made President of the Institute, which brought Cuvier intofrequent personal intercourse with his future Sovereign. In1802 Napoleon, desiring to reorganize the schools of France,appointed six General Inspectors to establish Lyceums in thirtycities of the empire. Cuvier was made one, and in that capacityhe established the first Lyceums (now Royal Colleges) of Mar-seilles and Bourdeaux. It was while absent from Paris, onthis embassy, that the Secretaries of the Institute were madeperpetual, and Cuvier was appointed to that of the PhysicalSciences. When at Marseilles he availed himself of thefavourable opportunity to extend his inquiries into the structureof the mollusca. During this interval the two first volumesof the Lecons were translated into the English language ; butthe same respect has not been shown to the other three, whichare not inferior in merit. The translation of these two volumeswas executed by Mr. Ross, with the careful revisal of ProfessorMacartney of Dublin. A translation of the first lecture, whichcontains a luminous view of the laws of animal economy, hadbeen published in a separate form by Mr. Allan, surgeon, ofEdinburgh. The numerous avocations both of M. Dumeriland M. Cuvier prevented them from devoting the time andattention to the concluding volumes which they had devotedto the preceding; and Dr. Duvernoy, though aided by themanuscript notes of the former, and the plates, preparations,descriptions, and regular revisal of the latter, had many dis-sections to perform and repeat, and many deficiencies to supplyin his difficult and meritorious task of completing the work.Cuvier had opportunities of dissecting many rare and unknownanimals while the later volumes of the Comparative Anatomywere preparing, partly from the Menageries of the Garden ofPlants and of Malmaison, and partly brought from a distancein spirits, by Geoffroy and Savigny from Egypt, by Peron fromAustralasia, by Humboldt from America, by Homberg andFleuriau from the coasts of France, and by Cuvier himself fromthe Mediterranean. In his interesting letter to Lacepede, Pro-fessor of Zoology in the Museum of Natural History, insertedat the beginning of the third volume, he details briefly theprogress of Comparative Anatomy during the five precedingyears, and the important influence which his own researchesfor fifteen years had exerted in reforming the methodicalarrangements of zoologists; the absurd classifications of theLinna?an school, founded solely on external form or on a singlecharacter, and the necessary dependance of correct zoological ar-rangements on the progress and application of zootomical know-ledge, are also pointed out with great distinctness and ability.The Organs of Digestion form the subject of the third volume;and, in treating of this function, many important parts of thesystem are described with great minuteness and detail. Theform, structure, and motions of the jaws j the teeth of mam-malia, reptiles, and fishes; the salivary glands, the organs ofmastication and deglutition; the structure and peculiarities ofthe oesophagus, stomach, and intestinal canal, throughout thevarious classes of animals, are successively described, and inevery part illustrated with original observations. The pecu-liarities of the liver, pancreas, and spleen, and the digestiveapparatus of invertebrate animals, form the first subjects of thefourth volume; the heart and circulating organs, the organs ofrespiration in land and aquatic animals, and the organs of voice,so intimately connected with atmospheric respiration, are de-scribed at great length in the same volume. The organs ofgeneration and those of excretion occupy the fifth volume.Throughout these volumes, the parts which relate to the organi-zation of insects and molluscous animals are the exclusive pro-ductions of M. Cuvier; and, probably, no anatomist then living,besides himself, was qualified to undertake these obscure partsof zootomy. In what relates to the digestive system of themammalia, nearly all the interesting facts collected by Dauben-ton, in his Description of the Cabinet, have been incorporated.In the tables of the classification of the whole animal kingdom,added to this work, many important improvements are intro-duced into the arrangements of the Tableau Elementaire ;partly resulting from M. Cuvier's own more extended inquiries,and partly adopted from the eminent writers who, during thisperiod, had illustrated many separate branches of zoology. Inwhat relates to the classification of quadrupeds and birds, he hasavailed himself of the improvements introduced by Lacepede,and in the arrangement of the testaceous mollusca, he has beenassisted by the labours of Lamarck. The vermes and crustaceahere form two classes distinct from that of insects ; the formerarrangement of reptiles, taken from Lacepede, is changed for themore convenient subdivisions of Brogniart, into chelonia, sauria,ophidia, and batrachia. The entozoa are placed, provisionally,in the class of vermes; and the infusoria still succeed theMedusae in the class of zoophytes.During the composition of the Lecons, M. Cuvier had col-lected many interesting observations regarding the fossil bonesaccumulated in the strata around Paris. In his visit to Italy hehad examined the situations most famed for the fossil remainsof animals they afforded, and many distinguished naturalistshad sent him from distant parts of Europe remains, or drawingsor descriptions, of animals found in a fossil state. The immensecollection of skeletons preserved in the Cabinet of ComparativeAnatomy at Paris, afforded him the means of instituting thenecessary comparisons of the fossil with the existing species,and must have greatly assisted and encouraged him in his earlyattempts to decipher the remains of the higher classes of animalsso frequently submitted to his inspection. The certainty ofthe truths thus brought to light, the novelty of the results, andtheir important applications to the hitherto fanciful speculationsof geology, excited the liveliest interest among the naturalistsof Europe to the curious and novel investigations of M. Cuvier;and the success of his labours in identifying the fossil bones ofthe mammalia, affords the most splendid illustration of theutility of zootomical knowledge, as applied to geological investi-gation, which has yet been recorded in the history of thatscience. The opportunities which M. Cuvier enjoyed forprosecuting these geological inquiries were such as no natura-list ever before possessed; but it must also be said, that noman ever before possessed in a more eminent degree, thanCuvier, all the requisite qualifications for the successful em-ployment of these advantages. His indefatigable industry, andhis enthusiasm in these pursuits, his practical acquaintancewith all the collateral sciences, and his extensive general know-ledge, the beauty of his language, and the elevated tone of hisdescriptions, the extent and grandeur of his general views, andthe sublime truths they have unfolded regarding the past revolu-tions of the animal kingdom and of the globe we inhabit,convince us that no other naturalist in his situation could haveso successfully performed what he has accomplished, in regardto the restoration of extinct species of animals. These re-searches now occupy seven large quarto volumes, illustratedwith more than two hundred engraved plates; they have madeus acquainted with at least seventy species of animals beforeentirely unknown to naturalists, and have pointed out the occur-rence of eleven or twelve known existing species in a fossilstate, besides many other species of animals which have notyet been identified.Cuvier was appointed, in 1808, one of the councillors for lifeof the Imperial University, which was created that year byNapoleon. This sedentary appointment accorded well withthat of Perpetual Secretary of the Institute, and led Cuvieroften to discuss affairs of administration before the Council ofState, and in presence of the emperor. In this capacity he wassent in 1809 and 1810, to organize the academies of the Italianstates which had been recently added to the empire ; and thejudicious arrangements which he made at Turin, Genoa, andPisa, were found so advantageous, that at the return of therespective sovereigns of these states, the measures adopted byCuvier were preserved inviolate. In 1811 he had a similarmission to Holland and the Hanse Towns, and many of thechanges and nominations which he made there, are still re-spected and preserved. When at Hamburgh, he was informedthat the emperor had conferred upon him the title of Chevalier,with an hereditary endowment. Though a Protestant by country,birth, and education, he was sent, in 1813, to organize the Uni-versity of Rome; and some of the improvements which heintroduced into the University of La Sapienza, were retainedeven after the return of the pope. When in that city, he re-ceived intelligence of his appointment as Master of Requests,a place in the ministry to which he had been called by apersonal resolution of Napoleon, who was acquainted with theacts of Cuvier's administration as Councillor of the University,both from his own observation and from the favourable reportof Fontane. During his numerous missions through the vastterritories formerly subservient to France, on affairs connectedwith the state, Cuvier never omitted the opportunities theyafforded him of prosecuting his favourite scientific investiga-tions.The great accumulations of the bones of elephants whichM. Cuvier saw in Italy, convinced him that they could not havebelonged to the few animals of this species lost by Hannibal intraversing that country, but must have belonged to speciesinhabiting that part of the globe at a much more remote period.The same cause is assigned by him for their remains occurring inEngland, Ireland, Germany, Denmark, Norway, Poland, Russia,Siberia, and in the islands and shores of the Polar Seas.Kotzebue found them common on the coasts of America withinthe Arctic Circle, and Parry, in Melville Island, where the tem-perature is now frequently fifty degrees below the freezingpoint. The great animal of the Ohio has been restored byCuvier, the bones of which were considered by Daubenton tobelong to the elephant and hippopotamus. Cuvier has identifieddifferent species of this animal to which he has given the nameMastodon, from the nipple-like form of the grinding teeth. Thefossil hippopotami and rhinoceroses, which are so abundant inthe valley of the Arno, Cuvier has been enabled to ascertain, bymeans of the skeletons of the recent species he has procuredfor the Museum. The rhinoceros of Caffreria, described by SirE. Home, as similar to the fossil species, was shown by M.Cuvier to differ from the latter in not having the septum of thenostrils ossified as in the allied fossil species. The pretendedfossil human skeleton of Scheuchzer, which Camper suspectedto be that of a lizard, was carefully examined by Cuvier whenat Haerlem, where it is preserved in the Museum, and shewn toto be, what he had previously announced it to be, a giganticsalamander. Cuvier examined at Pavia the collection of fossilbones brought from the Island of Cerigo, and asserted bySpallanzani to be remains of the human species, and found thatnot a single fragment of them had ever formed a part of ahuman skeleton, but were all remains of ruminating animals.He has determined nearly twelve species of the extinct genusPalaeotherium, some of which were nearly as large as a rhino-ceros ; they appear from the shells which are found along withtheir bones, to have frequented the banks of rivers andmarshes. The immense accumulations of bones found in thecaves of Gaylenreuth, on the frontiers of Bayreuth, Cuvier foundto have belonged almost entirely to extinct species of bears,which must have lived and died peaceably in the situationswhere we now discover their remains. The remarkable fossilanimal of South America, the Megatherium, which measurestwelve feet in length, and six or seven in height; and theMegalonyx, nearly as large, Cuvier has ascertained to havebeen closely allied, in their general characters, to the slothsand ant-eaters of that country. He has found the bones of aspecies of opossum in the gypsum quarries of Paris, and thusconfuted the opinion of those who maintained all such bonesto have been flooded north from Asia, as the animals of thisgenus are inhabitants only of the New World. Two species ofseals have been discovered by Cuvier in the Coarse marine lime-stone of the department of the Maine and Loire, one of whichis nearly three times as large as the common species still inha-biting our seas, and in the same locality he has found twounknown species of Lamantins. His labours have been scarcelyless productive in the class of reptiles, of which he has pointedout many extraordinary and gigantic species found in a fossilstate.From the examination of the numerous extinct species ofanimals found in the gypsum quarries of Montmartre, CuvierAvas naturally led to study the nature and superposition of thevarious strata containing them, and in conjunction with M.Brongniart, Professor of Mineralogy, he Undertook a laboriousand extensive examination of the geological structure of theParis basin, and of the surrounding country. The results oftheir investigations form an important part of the great workon Fossil Organic Remains, and one of the most valuable con-tributions which geology has ever received. They have shownthe country around that capital to be formed by a successionof marine and fresh-water deposits, as if by the flux and effluxof salt and fresh water over that extensile district. Above thechalk, which forms the bottom of the great basin they ex-amined, rest the plastic clay and coarse marine limestone,both containing, as well as the chalk itself, remains ofmarine animals. On these strata rests the great gypsumfresh-water formation, containing remains of quadrupeds, birds,and reptiles, and of fishes and shells belonging to fresh-waterspecies. Marl and sandstone containing the remains of marineanimals lie on the gypsum formation, and these are coveredWith beds of flint and silicious limestone, abounding with fresh-water shells. All these strata are covered with a dark-colouredcarbdnaceous alluvium composed of sand, marl and clay, andcontaining trunks of trees, and bones of elephants, oxen, andother large quadrupeds. These interesting geological detailsoccupy more than six hundred pages, and are illustrated Withgeological maps and numerous sections of strata, not only ofthe Paris basin, but also of similar formations in Italy, Swit-zerland, and Germany. Numerous plates are also given of theinvertebrate animals which occur in these beds, and which havebeen carefully identified by Lamarck, Defrance, Audouin, andother zoologists; in what relates to the fossil vegetables, manyof which are figured, the work has been assisted by the late re-rearches of M. Adolphus Brogniart.The preliminary discourse in the first volume of this workcontains so many grand and original views of the revolutionswhich have taken place on the surface of this globe and in theanimal kingdom, and is Composed in a style at once so profound,elegant, and attractive, that It has long been translated intothe English language both in this country and in America,and more recently also into the German language. Thetranslations of Dr. Mitchel of New York, and Professor Jamesonof Edinburgh, are enriched with numerous original notes andillustrations ; and the translation of the latter has gone throughfive large editions. The original discourse is now published inParis as a separate work, and both in an octavo and quarto form.Besides the preliminary discourse and the elaborate memoirs onthe osteology of the recent and extinct species of elephants andhippopotami, and on the remains of the fossil mastodons, thefirst volume Contains a dissertation on the ibis, so much reveredby the ancient Egyptians, in which he has attempted to show byan examination of several mummies of the bird from the tombsof Thebes, and from historical documents, that it still exists inthat country as in the time of the Pharaohs, and that it has under-gone no perceptible change in its form since that remote period.In treating of the other pachydermatous animals in the secondvolume, which is chiefly occupied with the geology of the Paris formation,M. Cuvier has entered into the same minute and ex-tended details of the osteology of the living species, along withthat of the extinct races, as in the preceding volume, and thesame plan has been followed throughout the whole of this vastundertaking. The labour of collecting materials for so great awork during his travels and surveys in various parts of Europe,and the task of arranging and describing them, might be thoughtsufficient to have occupied the greater part of M. Cuvier's life;but they have afforded him leisure, not only for his numerousimportant public avocations, and for the composition of workseven more elaborate, but also to draw and even to engrave withhis own hands some of the most detailed osteological plates con-tained in this voluminous work. The third volume is principallyoccupied with a detailed account of the means employed torestore the species of pachydermatous animals found in thegypsum quarries around Paris, by the careful examination andcomparison of their separate bones. It is illustrated with eightyquarto engraved plates, the greater part of which are from thepencil of Cuvier's able assistant, Laurillard, one of the mostskilful anatomical designers in Europe. It is fortunate for theinterests of ichthyology, that the same accurate and elegantdraughtsman has undertaken the elaborate folio anatomical platesof the great work on Fishes, now publishing by Cuvier andValenciennes. In determining the fossil remains of the mam-malia, Cuvier considers the examination of the molar teeth asaffording by far the most important characters. By these we atonce perceive whether an animal is carnivorous or herbivorous,and when it belongs to the latter order we can generally deter-mine by the forms of these teeth the particular kind of herbi-vorous animals to which it is most nearly allied. Cuvier wasinduced to commence his researches with the pachydermata,from their occurring in most abundance in the newest alluvialformations, from the great size of their bones and the facilityof identifying the species, and from the imperfect state of ourknowledge regarding the osteology of these gigantic inhabitantsof tropical climates. Besides the extended descriptions of thePalseotheria and Anoplotheria, this volume contains an accountof other pachydermatous animals, and of Carnivora, Rodentia,a species of Opossum, the remains of birds, tortoises, crocodiles,and fishes which occur along with them in the same gypsumformation, and the whole is terminated by a lengthened mono-graph on the fossil vegetation of the environs of Paris, byM. A. Brogniart.The ruminating animals differ remarkably in several of theircharacters from the other orders of mammalia, as in the imper-fection of their dental system, in the structure of their stomach,and in the forms of their horns; yet they resemble each other somuch, and are so numerous, that their discrimination is attendedwith great difficulty both with regard to the recent animals andthe extinct species. Important generic characters are often takenfrom the form of their horns, those most changeable of all theirexternal parts according to their age, sex, and climate. Tofacilitate his researches into this .numerous tribe of fossil mam-malia, M. Cuvier, in his fourth volume, enters at considerablelength into the characters of the existing species as taken fromthe teeth, the head, and the rest of the skeleton, and thendescribes the different fossil species of deers, oxen, and otherruminating animals, determined chiefly by their horns, and foundin various situations in France, Germany, and other parts ofEurope. He has attempted, in the same manner, to decipherthe bones of the ruminating animals found in so great abundancein osseous brecchias, in fissures, and caves, at Gibraltar, Cette,Antibes, Nice, Uliveto, Cape Palinurus, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily,Dalmatia, Cerigo, Concud, and Verona. His views in regardto the antiquity of these osseous accumulations in caves andfissures, have been modified by the interesting discoveries andconclusions of our zealous and learned countryman ProfessorBuckland; and he agrees with this eminent geologist as to themanner in which these bones have been collected together andenveloped in the diluvium. M. Cuvier proceeds in the samemanner with the numerous order of carnivorous animals as withthe ruminantia, to determine the osteological characters of thevarious existing races, before attempting to identify the fossilspecies. The teeth present very important and useful discrimi-nating characters, both in the carnivora and rodentia, from thestriking diversities they exhibit in the genera of these orders.In determining the fossil species of these animals, M. Cuvierwas greatly aided by the elaborate and useful work which hisbrother had undertaken, at his request, on the forms andarrangement of the teeth in all the existing genera of this class.This volume concludes with the description of the discoveredfossil species of bears, hyaenas, wolves, foxes, and other smallcarnivorous animals, and the whole of the details are illustratedwith numerous valuable plates representing chiefly the forms ofthe teeth, the jaws, the entire crania, and other essential partsof the osteology. The osteology of the rodentia, edentata, andmarine mammalia, and the investigation of the fossil speciesof these orders, occupy the first part of the fifth volume, whichis illustrated with twenty-seven plates, representing the skeletonsand the separate bones of many rare and interesting animals,as the echidna, the ornithorhyncus, the dtigohg, the lamantin,and several cetaceous animals scarcely to be met with in anyother museums but that of the Garden of Plants.The number of rodentia appears to have been as greatin the ancient world as at present, and most of the speciesappear to have been small as those now met with in a luringstate. After showing the gradual transition to this orderof quadrupeds in the systems of dentition presented by theBpecies belonging to the marsupial genera phalangista, macro-pus, and phascolomys, Cuvier details the characters of theorder rodentia, and of the recent genera it comprehends, andenters particularly into the description of the molar teeth, theform of the head, and the characters which may be obtainedfrom the other parts of the skeleton. In treating of the fossilrodentia, particularly those found in cares, he has given a fullaccount of the interesting researches of Dr. Btickland, in regardto the species of this order met with in the cares of Kirkdale, andhas endeavoured to identify some of the separate bones of theseanimals represented in the plates of the Keliquia Diluvianje.These bones appear to have belonged chiefly to species of mice,rats, and hares. The Trogontheriutn Cuvieri, is a large fossil spe-cies belonging to this order, and agreeing in all its characters withthe genus castor; it was found on the sandy banks of the sea ofAzof, and measures a fifth larger than the recent species of Europeor America. The skeletons of those singular quadrupeds, thesloths, ant-eaters, and mortotremata, are the next described inthis volume. Cuvier was the fir9t to point out to Daubenton,thirty years ago, the remarkable irregularity observed in thecervical vertebra of the sloth, called the Ai, where their num-ber amounts to nine, being two more than are met With in almostall the other mammalia. The great length of the anterior ex-tremities of this animal, and of some other sloths is regardedby Cuvier as a principal cause of their remarkable slowness ofmotion, and of their feebleness. They present, likewise, remark-able peculiarities in the form of the pelvis, and in the union ofits parts, in the mode of articulation of the hind feet, in therigidity of all the parts of the toes, in the manner in which thelong nails are folded under the feet during a state of rest, andin the articulations of the scapula and clavicle. The details onthe osteology of the monotremata, contained in this volume,though not applied to the determination of any fossil remains,form a most valuable Contribution towards the anatomy of thesemost singular of all the animals hitherto brought from NewHolland, and whose structure and nature have so much per-plexed the most eminent anatomists of Europe. It is remark-able, that, notwithstanding the knowledge we possess of theanatomy of the ornithorhyncus, one of these monotrematajnaturalists are not agreed as to the class to which that animalbelongs, Cuvier regarding it as a viviparous quadruped, Lessonas a bird allied to the penguin, and Geoffroy St. Hilaire asbelonging to an oviparous class, between quadrupeds and birds.The only fossil species hitherto discovered belonging tothe order edentataj are the megalonyx of Jefferson, fromNorth America, the great megatherium from Paraguay, andanother gigantic, though still unknown species, of whichCuvier has only been able to examine the plaster model ofa phalanx found in a pit of sand and gravel, supposed to havebeen formed by deposition from the Rhine, near Eppelsheim,in Hesse. The fossil species of marine mammalia are muchmore numerous, and Cuvier has described and figured theremains of extinct species of seals, lamantins, dolphins, narwals,whales, and cetaceous animals allied to the hyperoodons andcachalots, which he is particularly enabled to illustrate, bymeans of the rich collection of these animals preserved in hismuseum in the Garden of Plants. He has not, however,described all the remains of these animals in his possession,but has selected only those which afforded the means of beingsatisfactorily determined. By thus pointing out many speciesof marine mammalia, which are now extinct, he has furtherConfirmed the conclusion to Which naturalists had been led bythe study of fossil conchology ; that not only the productionsof the land have been changed by the revolutions which havetaken place on the surface of the globe, but that the sea itself,the chief agent in most of these revolutions, has changed itsinhabitants. The gigantic bulk and force of the cetacea havenot better protected their species in the ocean, than the sizeand strength of the elephants, rhinoceroses, hippopotami,mastodons, and megatheria, have enabled them to resist onland the revolutions which have destroyed their race.It is not a little remarkable, that among the fossil remains ofvertebrate animals, there should so seldom be found the boneseither of birds or of serpents. This cannot be ascribed merelyto the delicacy of their skeleton, and the consequent difficultyof preserving it in the rocky strata, or of collecting its parts,from these ancient beds, as we find in many of the olderstrata, the skeletons of the smallest fishes preserved withthe most delicate spines of their fins uninjured. The saurianreptiles are much more common, and the batrachia arealso frequently found in a fossil state. The crocodile, of allthe saurian reptiles, presents the nearest affinities in its oste-ology, to that of the mammalia; in determining the natureof its separate bones, their relative position is examined, themuscles which are attached to them arc considered, the bloodvessels and nerves which pass through their foramina areascertained, and all similar indications are carefully sought forand applied. From this determination of the bones, particular]ythose of the head of the crocodile, we obtain a solution of themore difficult analogies in the osteology of the other saurian rep-tiles, and likewise of the tortoises and serpents. The batrachianreptiles present anomalies which require a different kind ofinvestigation from that of the other orders of their class. M.Cuvier deprecates, as visionary, the ingenious views of thosewho endeavour to decipher the osteology of the cranium ofthese animals, by comparing the bones of the head of verte-brate animals to a series of dilated vertebrae. After thus care-fully determining the osteology of each of the recent genera ofreptiles, and illustrating all the details with large engravings,he proceeds in the last part of the fifth volume of this stupen-dous monument of his profound zootomical knowledge andindefatigable spirit of research, to examine the characters of theremarkable extinct species of these animals. The remains ofreptiles occupy a series of strata much more ancient than thosewhich contain the fossil bones of mammalia, even of theaquatic species. The chalk formation, and all the strata ofanterior date, present no trace of the former existence of mam-miferous animals, which are all confined to newer formations ;but the chalk strata, and all the older strata of the secondaryseries, to the great coal formation, abound with remains of tor-toises, crocodiles, and lizards, which have even left distincttraces of their footsteps on the now solid sandstones of thelatter formation, as in the sandstone quarries of Dumfriesshirein Scotland, although very few of these animals are nowfound in strata newer than the chalk. At the remote periodalluded to, only cold-blooded reptiles moved upon the dry land,and the bottom of the sea was peopled with species of ammo-nites, belemnites, terebratulites, encrinites, and many othergenera now almost entirely extinct.After establishing the division of the great family of croco-diles into three subgenera of alligators, crocodiles properly socalled, and gavials, (the first of which is distinguished by havingthe fourth tooth of the lower jaw on each side, received into adepression of the upper jaw-bone, and by having the feet semi-palmated; the second, by the same tooth on each side of thelower jaw, passing through a distinct fissure of the uppermaxillary bones, the feet palmaled, and the beak oblong; andthe gavials forming the third division, are distinguished fromthe other two subgenera, by having an elongated cylindricalbeak, and palmated feet,) M. Cuvier examines, with greatminuteness and detail, the separate bones of the living speciesof crocodiles. The bones of the head are carefully comparedwith the corresponding bones of the mammalia, the bones ofthe trunk and extremities are illustrated with equal detail, andthe whole skeleton is contrasted with those of the alligators andgavials at present existing. The fossil species of these animalsare next described; both those known to preceding observers,and those ascertained by M. Cuvier. The gavial of the calca-reous slates of Franconia, described by Soemmerring, that ofthe limestone quarries of Caen, and the bones of two unknownspecies found near Honfleur and Havre, are described at greatlength. Several crocodiles have been found in the chalk andin the strata immediately adjacent above and beneath that for-mation, as in the chalk of Mendon, in the ferruginous sandbeneath the chalk in Sussex, in the plastic clay of Auteuil, andin Provence, and the island of Sheppy. Remains of thesereptiles are likewise described by Cuvier, found along with thepalaeotheriums and lophiodons, in formations newer than thechalk, and which not only differ from the more ancient species,but distinctly approach in their characters to the existing races,as in the gypsum quarries, in the marl of Argenton, in thegravel beds of Castelnaudary, those found near Blaye, andthose found at Brentford and at Mans.M. Cuvier has described, in the same manner, the recentand fossil species of chelonian reptiles, the land and freshwater tortoises, and those which still inhabit the sea, and the.fossil species found in various parts of Italy, France, Switzer-land, Germany, and England. After describing the generalosteology of the recent species of lizards, he examines thefacts connected with the fossil monitors found at Thuringenand other parts of Germany; the great saurian reptile found inthe quarries of Maestricht; the gigantic lizard, discovered bySoemmerring near Monheim, and termed geosaurus by Cuvier;the huge megalosaurus, found by Buckland in the polite ofStonesfield, near Oxford; the saurian reptile, discovered byGaillardeau, in the quarries of compact limestone near Lune-ville; and the four discovered species of pterodactylus, a genusdistinguished by the extraordinary length of the fourth toeof the anterior extremities. The observations and plates,illustrative of the osteology of the recent species of batra-chian reptiles, form a valuable contribution to ComparativeAnatomy; and the details regarding the fossil bones of thegreat em, principally by English naturalists, haveenabled M. Cuvier to represent, in his concluding plate, theentire skeletons of these extraordinary aquatic reptiles, asthey existed in our ancient seas.The views of M. Cuyier regarding the extinct races of verte-brate animals, and the facts he had collected relating to them,were first published as a series of detached memoirs in theAnnales du Museum d'Histoire Naturelle; and in 1812 thesememoirs were collected by the author, connected together bymeans of supplementary articles and a preliminary discourse,and published as a separate work, forming the first edition ofhis 'Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles,' in four quartovolumes. A second edition was published in 1817, in fivevolumes, quarto. After nearly ten years of continued researchin the same interesting field of inquiry in various parts ofEurope, M. Cuvier commenced, in 1821, a new edition of thework, which was completed in 1824 in seven quarto volumes,though forming only five according to the plan of the work.It has been recently reprinted, with a new edition of the pre-liminary discourse. This work, which is the greatest monument,of the genius, learning, and industry of Cuvier, has reformedthe science of geology, and greatly advanced our knowledgeof Comparative Anatomy; and is justly styled, by our mosteminent mineralogist, Professor Jameson, the most splendidcontribution to Natural History furnished by any individual ofthis age.The writings and researches of Cuvier, however, have notalways been limited to the animal creation. He has, for manyyears, been in the habit of employing his leisure hours incollecting the most interesting historical facts, in examiningthe scientific labours, and in composing biographical memoirsof the most eminent members of the French Institute whohave died during that period. These historical discoursesare designed to commemorate the services rendered to scienceby the most distinguished members of that learned body, andare generally composed and read before the Royal Academy ofSciences, soon after the decease of any of its most valuableassociates. The biographical memoirs, composed by M. Cuvieron such occasions, during a period of nearly thirty years, andread before the Institute of France, have been recently collectedand published as a separate work, which consists of three octavovolumes. All the most interesting memoirs of these volumeshave been translated into the English language, and publishedseparately in our periodical Journals. The first volume com-mences with an interesting sketch of the progress of the sciencesand their influence on human society, which was read at theopening of the Academy in 1816, and contains historicalsketches of the scientific labours of Daubenton, Lemounnier,l'Heritier, Gilbert, Darcet, Priestley, Cels, Adanson, Brous-sonnet, Lassus, Ventenat, Bonnet, and Saussurethirteendistinguished scientific characters connected with the Institute,and whose lives were read by M. Cuvier, before that Assembly,between the years 1800 and 1810. The second volume con-tains the biographical memoirs composed by M. Cuvier, from1810 to 1819, embracing the lives of Fourcroy, Desessarts,Cavendish, Pallas, Count Rumford, Parmentier, Olivier, Tenon,Werner, Desmarets, Riche, and Bruguieres. The same volumecontains the oration delivered by M. Cuvier before the FrenchAcademy in 1818, on being elected to the place vacant by thedeath of M. de Roquelaure, and the answer to that oration,written by the Count de Seze, then Director of the Academy.These two volumes were published in J819. The-third volumemade its appearance so late as 1827, and contains historicalmemoirs of M. de Beauvois, Sir Joseph Banks, Duhamel,Haiiy, Berthollet, Richard, Thouin, Count Lacepede, Halle,Corvisart, Pinel, and Fabbroni, together with two funeralorations in honour of Van Spaendonck and the Chevalier De-lambre. The volume concludes with two interesting andlearned dissertations on the recent discoveries and presentstate of Natural History and Chemistry; the former readbefore the Academy in 1824, and the latter in 1826, These^ volumes display an extensive and intimate acquaintance withall the physical sciences, and with the progress of discovery ineach of their various departments : their style is elegant, easy,tf and perspicuous, and in bestowing encomiums on departed$ talents, they are composed with great judgment and impartiality.The same remarks are applicable to the elaborate historicalsketch of the Progress of the Physical Sciences from 1789to 1801, which M. Cuvier drew up as Perpetual Secretaryof the Academy of Sciences, and presented to the Frenchgovernment, in the name of the Institute, in 1808, and ofwhich a new edition was published in 1827. In this compre-hensive memoir he has entered into the minutest details of thevarious chemical theories of that period; he has examined theimportance of the different experiments and discoveries on whichthese were founded, and the instruments invented to facilitatethese investigations; and he has traced the march of thescience for twenty years, in all its separate departments. Innatural history he has followed the progress of discovery withequal minuteness, in meteorology, hydrology, mineralogy, geo-logy, physiology, anatomy, botany, zoology, and comparativeanatomy. And in treating of the application of these sciencesto practical purposes, he has detailed the various improvementsrecently introduced into medicine, surgery, the veterinary art,and agriculture, and the important advantages which have re-sulted from the application of natural history and chemistryto the arts and manufactures. Although M. Cuvier acknow-ledges the liberal assistance he received from his learned col-leagues in the composition of this early and extensive survey ofthe physical sciences, the memoir displays, in every part, anauthor familiar with all the departments of inquiry which itembraces, and it presents a luminous view of the state of thephysical sciences at the period when it was officially presentedto the emperor.This interesting and elaborate memoir has been again re-printed at Paris to form the first volume of the extensive workpublished last year (1829) by Cuvier, on the Progress of thePhysical Sciences from 1789 to 1827, in four volumes 8vo.This work, embracing a field of investigation as extensive asthat traced in the first volume, is composed of the Reportsannually delivered by M. Cuvier to the Academy of Sciences onthe progress of the physical sciences during the preceding year.These reports, however, have not been printed as they wereread by Cuvier at the meetings of the Institute. The partsrelating to each branch of science have been carefully arrangedunder the respective departments, so as to exhibit a connectedview of the progress of the various branches of Physical sciencefor a period of twenty years from that at which the first volumeterminates. The separate branches of science under which theinteresting details of this work are arranged, are Physics,Chemistry, and Meteorology, Mineralogy and Geology, Botany,and Vegetable Physiology, Anatomy, Physiology, and Zoology,Medicine, and Surgery. The general march of discoveryin each of these departments of physical investigation istraced with equal learning and impartiality. And while thewhole work exhibits a faithful and connected outline of the suc-cessive improvements introduced into these sciences during thelast forty years, it presents a luminous and comprehensive viewof the present state of physical science in Europe.A period of twenty years had elapsed from the publication ofthe Tableau Elementaire to the appearance of the first editionof the Regne Animal in 1817, during which the study of com-parative anatomy and zoology had been cultivated with increasedardour in every part of Europe, and our knowledge of theorganization and species of the animal kingdom had been almostdoubled. This rapid advancement was principally due to thecontinued and well-directed exertions of M. Cuvier, to the elo-quence and genius of his writings, to the importance, originality,and attractive nature of his views, and to the greatly increasedopportunities afforded him by his situation in the Garden ofPlants. From the comprehensive nature of the Regne Animal,embracing equally the structure and history of all the existingand extinct races of animals, this work may be viewed as anepitome of M. Cuvier's zoological labours ; and it presents thebest outline, which exists in any language, of the present stateof zoology and comparative anatomy. The work is in fourvolumes octavo, with fifteen plates, and treats of the organizationand characters of all the divisions, classes, orders, and genera ofthe animal kingdom, from man to the lowest of the infusoria.The third volume, treating of the three principal classes ofarticulated animals, was entirely composed by M. Latreille,and the concurrent testimony of all the naturalists of Europein favour of his views, have afforded M. Cuvier a convincingproof of the correctness of his choice, in selecting that profoundentomologist to conduct this important part of the work. Inthe new edition of the Regne Animal, four volumes of whichhave been already published during the last year, the partintrusted to Latreille has extended to two volumes, thus aug-menting the work by at least an entire volume. The concludingvolume of this new edition, comprehending all the classes ofmolluscous and radiated animals, is looked for with equalanxiety by all naturalists. Notwithstanding the lapse of twelveyears between these two editions, the general plan of the workand the distribution of the animal kingdom are so nearly thesame in both, as not to require a separate examination in thisplace.The four great divisions of the animal kingdom pointed outmore than thirty years ago in the Tableau Elementaire, havebeen adopted in both editions of the Regne Animal, and esta-blished by more extended details, and by characters more preciseand correct. These four divisions are termed vertebrata,mollusca, articulata, and radiata; and each of them compre-hends several classes. They are founded on extensive andaccurate analogies, and have been sanctioned by long andgeneral adoption; but they convey no idea of any uniformprinciple of classification applied to the whole animal kingdom.The first division is founded on the presence of the vertebralcolumn, a part of the organization of comparatively little im-portance in the economy; the second division is founded onthe general softness of the body when deprived of its skeleton,a character which becomes more and more appropriate to theclasses of animals as we recede from the mollusca towards theinfusoria ; the third is founded on the divisions or articulationsof the skeleton, which are merely the result of its covering thesurface of these animals, and have no important influence onthe rest of the organization ; and the fourth is establisbed ona peculiarity in the external form of the body almost limited tothe echinodermata, and not applicable to the entozoa, zoophyta,and infusoria, which constitute by much the greatest portion ofthis division. We cannot help thinking that the science ofcomparative anatomy is now so far advanced, as to afford themeans of distributing the animal kingdom on some moreuniform and philosophical principles,as on the modificationsof those systems or functions which are most general in theanimal economy. The characters for such a philosophicaldistribution might be looked for in the modifications of thegenerative system, or the digestive, or the nervous system;and, indeed, attempts have already been made, both in Germanyand in this country, to found the divisions of the animal kingdomon the simple modifications presented by the nervous system.It is greatly to be regretted that, with his vast resources forthe improvement of this part of our nomenclature and arrange-ment, he has overlooked these minutiae of zoological distributionand remained fettered by his earliest views of classification.Had he taken the same liberties with his own classifications inevery successive publication, which he took with those ofLinnaeus when he attacked and reformed them thirty-five yearsago, the present room for improvement in all this part of thescience could not have existed.The first great division of the animal kingdom, M. Cuvierhas divided, as is usually done, into four classes: viz. mam-malia, aves, reptilia, pisces. The term amphibia, employedby Linnaeus, Blumenbach, and many other naturalists, for thefour-footed reptiles, is used by Cuvier for a small group ofaquatic mammalia, comprehending the seal and the walrus. Inthe first edition of the Regne Animal (1817), the class mam-malia is divided into eight orders, bimana, quadrumana, sar-cophaga, rodentia, edentata, pachydermata, ruminantia, andcetacea. In the great order sarcophaga, the bat and the walrus,the lion and the mole, the kangaroo and the hedgehog, areall placed under the same division, from having claws and threekinds of teeth. The marsupial quadrupeds, in the new editionof the work, are removed from this singular group to form aseparate order; but the other discordant families are still lefttogether in the same order, although Blumenbach and othershad already separated the cheiroptera to form a division equalin importance to that of the quadrumana. The class of birdsis Bivided in both editions of the Regne Animal into six orders,nearly analogous to the six orders of Linnaeus, accipitres,passeres, scansores, gallinae, grallffi, palmipedes. The divisionof reptiles into four orders, chelonia, sauria, ophidia, andbatrachia, proposed by M. Brogniart, is adopted in both editionsof M. Cuvier's work, as it was in the Tables of Classificationof the Lecons d'Anatomie Comparee in 1800. In the formeredition the class of fishes was divided into eight orders, com-mencing with the cartilaginous, and terminating with the osseousfishes. The same eight orders are preserved in the new edition,but their arrangement is there reversed ; the cartilaginous fisheswhich approach nearest to the mollusca, in their general charac-ters, being placed at the bottom of the class; and this newarrangement is the same with that adopted in the great workon this class of animals publishing by M. Cuvier and M. Valen-ciennes. In the subdivisions of the orders, and in the distri-bution of the genera, many important improvements are intro-duced. The acanthopterygious fishes now stand at the head ofthe class, to which succeed the malacopterygii abdominales,malacopterygii pectorales, malacopterygii apodes, lophobranchii,plectognathi, chondropterygii branchiis apertis, and chondro-pterygii branchiis tectis. It is in the cartilaginous fishes be-longing to the last of these orders that we find the simplestorganization, and the most imperfect form of the skeleton metwith in all the vertebrate animals; and hence they form anatural link of connexion between the true osseous fishes andthe cephalopodous mollusca.The volumes of the Regne Animal which treat of the arti-culated division of the animal kingdom being the entire pro-duction of Latreille, do not come properly within this noticeof the scientific labours of M. Cuvier; and the volume of thenew edition, containing the account of the great divisions,mollusca and radiata, not being yet published, we have toascertain the views of M. Cuvier regarding the lowest classesof animals from the former edition of this work. The firstof his divisions of invertebrate animals is divided into sixclasses, the most perfect of which, comprehending those molluscamost nearly allied to fishes, is termed cephalopoda. These,and the pteropoda, which compose the second class, move toand fro in the sea freely by means of membranous expansionslike fins. The third class, termed gasteropoda, creep on amuscular disc or foot, placed under the belly. Those mol-lusca which have no distinct head, and have the mouth con-cealed under the mantle, as the inhabitants of bivalve shells andthe tunicated animals, form the fourth class, called acephala.The animals of the fifth class resemble those of the preceding,in being enveloped in a mantle; but the mouth placed on thefore part is surrounded with long fleshy and ciliated arms,which they can extend at pleasure to seize objects : these arecalled brachiopoda. The last class of this great division istermed cirrhopoda, and comprehends a remarkable tribe ofanimals, the details of whose organization connect them muchmore closely with the articulated animals than with the mol-lusca, particularly in their possessing a double longitudinal,knotted nervous cord, and numerous articulated members. Inthe third great division of the animal kingdom, termed arti-culata, M. Cuvier has carefully drawn up, from his own obser-vations, the account of the first class, called annelida, oneof the most remarkable of the invertebrate divisions, in theanimals belonging to it possessing a circulating fluid of ared colour like the blood of vertebrate animals. This smallbut anomalous class, was first established by M. Cuvier, in aMemoir read to the Institute of France in December, 1801,and has since been almost universally adopted. He hasdivided these animals into three orders, founded on characterstaken from the respiratory organs. The first order, termedtubicola, have the branchiae, in the form of small tufts, placedon the anterior part of the body, and almost all reside in tubes,like the serpula and sabella. The dorsibranchia, which formthe second order, have the branchue in form of ramified branches,or of plates situated on the middle, or along the sides of thebody, as-the common sand-worm of our coasts : these animalsgenerally reside in soft mud, or swim freely in the sea. Thelast order is termed abranchia, from the animals belonging toit exhibiting no apparent branchiae, and appearing to respire bymeans of the whole soft surface of their body, as the commonearth-worm. In placing this class of animals at the head ofthe articulata, M. Cuvier has probably been more guided by theconvenience of publication, than by the consideration oftheir structure, as none of them possess an organization socomplicated as that of the succeeding classes of articulatedanimals, described in the third volume of this work by La-treille, particularly of the class crustacea.The great varieties of form and organization presented by thelowest classes of the animal kingdom, render it much moredifficult to devise principles for their classification, than for thehigher orders, and it is in their divisions and arrangement thatwe find the greatest discordance among naturalists. M. Cuvier'sfourth great division of the animal kingdom, termed radiataor zoophyta, comprehends the echinodermata, entozoa, aca-lephse, zoophyta or polypi, and infusoria, which form the fiveclasses of this division. In the Tableau Elementaire the ab-sence of the nervous system is given as a principal character ofthis great division, and in the Regne Animal he mentions, thatwhen the nervous system is discernible, it is disposed in a ra-diated form. The nerves which have been discovered in theechinodermata and acalephac have, however, rather a circularform, and embrace the digestive sac, and in the intestinal wormsthe nerves form simple longitudinal filaments. Separate sexeshave been ascribed by several writers to the entozoa; but whenM. Cuvier states that most of the other zoophytes are hermaphro-dite and oviparous, we consider his proposition as inconsistentwith the best ascertained facts, M'hich tend to show that they areentirely destitute of sex, and are either gemmiparous or fissipa-rous. The echinodermata, comprehending the arterias, echinus,and similar animals, are adopted from Bruguiere, who gave themthat name from the spines which usually cover their surface.To this class Cuvier has added the holothuriaj which have nosuperficial spines, but have an internal structure similar to theother echinodermata. The intestinal worms, which form thesecond class of the radiated animals, Cuvier supposes to ori-ginate solely from previously existing parents by the mode ofgeneration usual in the higher classes; while Lamarck, Meckel,and many other naturalists, believe that they may sometimesoriginate from the materials of the animals in which they arefound. He conceives that, from the smallness of their germs,they may enter by the narrowest avenues of the body, and evenbe communicated to the embryos of animals before their birth.In the distribution of the entozoa, Cuvier has chiefly followedRudolphi. The acalepha; are divided into two orders; thosewhich have the body fixed like the actinia, and those whichhave it free like the mcduste. The polypi or true zoophytesare likewise divided into two orders; those which have thebody naked as the hydra, and those which are provided withan axis or polyparium as the gorgonia and madrepore. Thepedicellariee, placed in the first order, appear to us to be organsof the echinus present in every individual. The propertyascribed to the pennatuhe in the second order, of swimmingfreely by means of their contractions, and by the combinedaction of their polypi, is contradicted by the recent observationsof Dr. Grant on these animals, and by the analogy of all theother known species of this class. The fifth class of radiatedanimals, and the lowest in the animal kingdom, termedinfusoria, M. Cuvier has not attempted to define by theirstructure or form, but by their smallness; and consequentlythis class comprehends beings of very different organization.The first order is called rotifera, and comprehends those whichhave an oval gelatinous body, with a mouth, a stomach, anintestine, and an anus situate near the mouth. The genera sup-posed to have this complicated structure are the furcularia,tubicolaria, and brachionus. The second and only other orderof the infusoria is termed homogenea, and comprehends allthose animalcules which have no internal viscera, nor otherorgans, and often present no appearance of a mouth. Someof these have visible external cilia, as the urceolaria, tricoda,kerona, and some others, and a second group present no ex-ternal organs excepting sometimes a tail, as the cercaria,vibrio, enchelis, proteus, volvox and monas.The whole of the divisions, and the general distribution ofthe animal kingdom established by M. Cuvier in this work, arefounded on a more extensive and minute survey of the orga-nization than had ever before been taken, and many of the mostimportant distinctions among the orders and families are theresult of his own researches. Where his divisions have notbeen adopted, the valuable and original anatomical observationscontained in every part of the work have served as the bases ofthe new divisions proposed, and of almost all the improve-ments of zoological arrangement which have been introducedby the first appearance of the work. This truly useful andclassical work is justly adopted as a standard of reference bythe naturalists of every country, and the greater part of it hasalready been ably translated into our language in a form suitedto the importance of the great original.The class of fishes, the most numerous of all the vertebratedivision, presents the greatest difficulties to the zoologist in at-tempting to discover principles for their classification, from thegeneral sameness of their form and structure, and from the fewexternal parts which they present capable of affording cha-racters for their distribution. This interesting class of animalshas long occupied the particular attention of M. Cuvier ; and inthe first edition of the Regne Animal, he considered his accountof that class as the most important of all his contributions tothe natural history of vertebrate animals. Since the publicationof that work, in which Cuvier reformed almost the whole of thefamilies and genera of fishes, immense accessions have beenmade to the ichthyological part of the Paris Museum, bytravellers and navigators in all parts of the globe, and manyvaluable contributions have been added to ichthyology by thewritings of naturalists in different countries. When M. Cuvierfirst left his native country, in 1788, and resided with a Frenchfamily, in a pleasant retreat on the coast of Normandy, he dis-sected, described, and drew almost all the fishes met with on thecoast of La Manche. While engaged in organising the RoyalCollege of Marseilles, in 1803, he occupied his leisure hoursin examining the ichthyology of that part of the Mediterranean jand when engaged many years afterwards on a similar missionin the Italian States, he continued his ichthyological inquiriesat Genoa and other parts of the coast of Italy. It is chiefly,however, from the vast ichthyological treasures of the NaturalHistory Museum of Paris, accumulated for more than half acentury, from every part of the globe, and which have beenliberally submitted to his examination, that M. Cuvier hasderived the materials of the present work. When M. Cuvierand M. Valenciennes first undertook to publish a completehistory of that class of animals, it was calculated that the workwould extend to about twenty volumes octavo, and would em-brace the history of five thousand species. We have now thebest information for stating, that by the almost daily increaseof their materials since the commencement of their vast under-taking, these distinguished naturalists are now in possession ofmore than six thousand distinct species of fishes. Althoughthe account of the class of fishes in the new edition of theRegne Animal presents an outline of the classification adoptedin the great work on the natural history of these animals, itmust be considered as affording a very imperfect list of thegenera and families, which will necessarily be greatly increasedand often changed as the work proceeds. Four volumes ofthis work are already published, containing ninety-nine plates,and the plates of the fifth volume are considerably advanced.Although the work is the joint production of the two authors,the parts contributed by each are regularly pointed out in thelist of the species contained in each volume.The first volume contains the fullest account of the progressof ichthyology from the earliest period to the present times,which has yet appeared, and interesting biographical noticesof all the authors mentioned are given in the form of notes.The rich and vast library of M. Cuvier, which occupies a longsuite of apartments, could alone furnish the materials of thiselaborate history. For several centuries before Aristotle,ichthyology, and other branches of natural history, consistedonly of a series of detached observations, which scarcely meritedthe name of a science. The knowledge of this branch, collectedby Aristotle, was still very limited, and but little applicable tothe distinction of species; and succeeding naturalists continuedto copy him, and comment on his writings, till about the middleof the sixteenth century, when Kondeletius, Belon, and Salvianiprecisely at the same time recommenced the study of Nature,and laid the foundation of ichthyology, by giving accuratedescriptions and figures of several well-determined species offishes. Willoughby and Ray, however, were the first to attemptto classify the species, on scientific principles, derived fromtheir organization; a task afterwards accomplished by Artediand Linnteus, by giving precise limits to the genera, and placingunder them species well ascertained and accurately charac-terized. After a concise account of the knowledge possessedby the Egyptians, the Phoenicians, and the Carthaginians, re-garding this class of animals, Cuvier gives a minute accountof the opinions of Aristotle and other Greek writers respectingthem, and of the various Roman poets, historians, and naturalistswho have spoken of these animals. The writers of the middleage, and after the revival of letters, are examined with thesame minuteness; and the contributions of the ichthyologistsof the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, from Belon toBlasius and Valentin, are faithfully recorded. The writers onthe anatomy of fishes, from Fabricius to Swammerdam and ourcountryman Collins, are next examined; and the works of ich-thyologists, from Jonston and Willoughby to Pallas and Pennant,arc reviewed with the same minuteness. The accessions madeto our knowledge of this class of animals, by travellers andnavigators, from Commerson and Sonnerat to the latest voyagesof discovery, and all the important facts regarding the structureof fishes discovered by anatomists during the last and the pre-sent century, as well as the views of naturalists in almost everycountry of Europe regarding their classification, are carefullycollected and recorded with strict impartiality, in the elaboratehistorical sketch which occupies the half of the first volume.The introductory observations on the nature, the economicaluses, and the general characters of fishes, are drawn up withM. Cuvier's usual taste and elegance, and are peculiarly calcu-lated to engage the attention and excite the interest of thereader in commencing the study of these animals. After ashort account of the general structure and chemical compositionof the skeleton of fishes, the author enters at great length intothe particular anatomy and physiology of every part of thebody, illustrating all the details by the anatomy of the perch,which is minutely and beautifully represented in eight folioengravings. In the view of the distribution of the class offishes, with which the first volume terminates, they are dividedinto osseous and cartilaginous. The osseous fishes are dividedinto those which have the branchiae of a pectinated form, or inplates ; and those which have them in form of tufts, as thehippocampus. The osseous fishes, with pectinated branchiae,are divided, in the same binary mode, into those which havethe upper jaw free, and those which have the same part fixed.Those with the upper jaw free are the acanthopterygious andmalacopterygious divisions, and those with the jaw fixed forman order, which is thence called plectognathi. The great divi-sion of cartilaginous fishes is divided into three families,sturionii, plagiostomi, and cyclostomi. From the extremedifficulty of establishing well-marked subdivisions throughoutthe class, M. Cuvier has here principally relied on the moreconvenient divisions of families, of which he has enumeratedtwenty-eight as calculated to contain all the known genera andspecies of fishes. Although the division of this class intoorders well marked, proportionate, and convenient, is very farfrom being yet attained, the anatomical details of M. Cuvierregarding this class, which occupy the latter half of the firstvolume, may be considered as the most important step whichhas ever been made towards attaining that object, as they formthe best contribution which has yet been made to this branchof Comparative Anatomy.The cartilaginous fishes form a very distinct and convenientdivision of the class, presenting obvious characters, and com-prehending only about a tenth part of the known species ; butthe division of the rest of the class into two parts, founded onthe structure of the fins, which are soft and supported bybranched and articulated rays in the malocoptergygii, and arestiff and in part supported by undivided sharp osseous spines inthe acanthopterygii, is too general to serve for their distributioninto orders. M. Cuvier, impressed with the great importanceand value of these characters of Artedi, and disregarding all theattempts made by Ray, Linnaeus, Gouan, Pennant, Lacepede,Dumeril, Risso, Goldfuss, and other naturalists, to establishinferior divisions founded on the general form of the body, onthe position or absence of fins, or on the absence or nature ofthe operculum, has, throughout the volumes already published,entirely overlooked the usual method of zoologists, of distri-buting all the genera into appropriate and well-defined orders,and has only attempted to subdivide the great primary divisionsof the class into numerous natural families.The acanthopterygious fishes, which compose nearly threefourths of the known species, are divided into numerous subor-dinate groups, formerly regarded as genera, so intimately relatedto each other, and connected by transitions so imperceptible,that the whole may be regarded as an immense natural family,which cannot at present be disunited without losing sight oftheir most important relations. These subordinate groups arethe natural families which Cuvier has preserved, assigning toeach more definite characters, and preserving for it the name bywhich its principal genus is designated. The second and thirdvolumes are occupied with the history of the great family ofperches, which are taken first of all the acanthopterygiousfamilies, from the facility of obtaining these fishes, and theirimmense abundance in all parts of Europe. The common perch(perca fluviatilis, Lin.), one of the most beautiful and usefulof all our fresh-water fishes, is taken as the type of this greatfamily, and those species which have the closest resemblance toit are described in succession, and at considerable length. Thespecies of fifty other genera of this family are described in thesevolumes in the same detailed and scientific manner, and one ormore species of each of the genera are illustrated by accurateand elegantly finished octavo engravings, in praise of which it issufficient to state that they are from the pencil of Werner, wellknown to Europe for his accurate delineations in every branchof zoology. The fourth volume, the last which has appeared,comprehends the description of twenty-two genera, embracingall the species belonging to the second great family of acantho-pterygious fishes. This family comprehends the fishes mostnearly allied to that of the perches, and is distinguished byhaving the side of the head armed, by the suborbitar platescovering a greater or less portion of the cheek, and articulatingwith the preoperculum. It is divided into two distinct groupseasily recognised; the first having no free spinous rays in frontof the dorsal fin, and the second having only free spines inplace of a first dorsal fin. The first, and most numerous ofthese groups is subdivided into those which have two dorsalfins, of which there are ten genera, commencing with the Triglaof Linnaeus and Lacepeile, and terminating with the Platyce-phalus of Bloch, and those which have only a single dorsal fin,of which there are nine genera. The second group of thisfamily, or those with free spines instead of the first dorsal fin,comprehends the monocentris of Bloch, the gasterosteus of Lin-naeus, and Cuvier's remarkable new genus, the little tuberculatedoreosoma of the Atlantic, only an inch and a half in length,which forms the lowest limit of this family, from its suborbitarplates forming only a narrow arch on the side of the cheek, anduniting with the preoperculum only at the upper part. Fromthe minute and satisfactory details which are given of all theexternal characters, the history, the distribution, and thesynonymes of the species, and of the internal structure of thosewhich have been dissected, from the accuracy, the number, andthe elegance of the engravings, and from the vast and dailyincreasing resources of these naturalists, we anticipate, in thecompletion of this great work, a new and brilliant era in thehistory of Ichthyology.Arrived at the term of threescore years, crowned with everydistinction which genius and learning could obtain, oppressedwith the duties of his elevated and important rank in the state,and exhausted with half a century of continued and variedresearch, it might be expected that so vast an undertaking asthe examination and description of six thousand species ofalmost unknown animals, would be more than sufficient toengage every unoccupied minute of his life: yet, besides theconcluding part of the new edition of the Uegne Animal,embracing more than half of the classes of the animal king-dom, which is now preparing for publication, M. Cuvier is atthis instant actively engaged in arranging and preparing hisvast materials for a new edition of his early and celebratedwork on Comparative Anatomy. The immense improvementsintroduced into every part of the science within these thirtyyears, while they imperiously call for a new edition of the onlycomplete treatise on the subject, will render it a herculeanlabour to bring that extensive work up to the present state ofthe science. And he even now contemplates the commence-ment of a vast undertaking greater than all he has yet achieved,an undertaking alluded to in all his publications, the chief studyof his life, and the constant idol of his thoughts for thirty years,-a complete system of Comparative Anatomy, embracing adetailed account of all that is known of the organization of theanimal kingdom, and illustrated in every part with accuratezootomical engravings taken from nature. For this undertakingM. Cuvier has prepared an immense series of drawings andengravings, and for this he has formed the Museum of Com-parative Anatomy, which now far surpasses every thing of thekind in existence.But these achievements, vast as they may appear to us, mustbe looked upon as only the pastime of his leisure hours, when wereflect on his numerous and important public duties connectedwith the administration of the state. Indeed his zoologicalcareer is one to which he was driven by the troubles of 1788,which separated his country from Germany, bereaved him ofhis patrons, blasted his political prospects for which he hadprepared himself at the University of Stutgard, and caused himto seek employment in a foreign country: so that in resuminghis political career, and partaking in the administration ofFrance, instead of that of Wirtemburg, he has only followedhis original destination, and has now become the Counsellor ofState of a great monarch in place of being that of a petty prince.Notwithstanding the succession of rulers, the changes ofministry, and the frequent perturbations of France, Cuvier'spolitical progress has been as sure and regular as his march inscience. The catastrophe at Paris in 1814, happened at themoment when Cuvier was about to be named Counsellor ofState by the emperor; but that event only caused a delay of afew months, for Louis XVIII. conferred that dignity upon himin the month of September of the same year. M. RoyerCollard, and M. Becquey, with whom Cuvier had been longintimate, assisted in this preferment by making him known tothe Abbe de Montesquiou. It was also by the influence ofCollard and Montesquiou that he was retained in 1815 asMember of the Commission of Public Instruction, which wassubstituted for the Council of the University, and was chargedwith the functions of chancellor of that body, an honourabledistinction which he still retains. Since that period he has hada great share in the administration, not in mere political schemes,with which Cuvier has always declined interfering, but in manyof the projects of law, and in the whole administration of theinterior in so far as it depends on the Committee of the Interior,of the Council of State, and he has almost always been Com-missary of the king before the Chambers for the defence ofprojects of law. M. Cuvier occupies the second place in theUniversity of France, and not being a Catholic he could notreasonably aspire to the first. Besides his functions of Chan-cellor of the University, he is charged with the direction of theFaculties. Only during the famous hundred days was Cuvierseparated from the Council of State, but even then he retained,unmolested, his important situations connected with publicinstruction. When on a scientific visit to England in 1818, he receivedthe gratifying intelligence of his election as one of the Forty ofthe French Academy, a title reserved to reward only extraordi-nary merit, and the highest distinction which science can obtainin France or in Europe. At the close of the same year theMinistry of the Interior was proposed to M. Cuvier, but theconditions under which he would have accepted it could not berealized. In the beginning of 1819, however, he was namedPresident of the Committee of the Interior, of the Council ofState ; and notwithstanding the changes of ministry, M. Cuvierhas still preserved that place, because, however important initself, it is unconnected with political intrigues, and requiresonly method, a constant activity, a rigid discharge of duty, anda thorough acquaintance with the laws and the principles ofadministration. During the same year, Louis XVIII. spontane-ously granted him the title of Baron, for an act of loyalty withwhich he was personally touched. Cuvier has been severaltimes called to the cabinet Councils, and was officially presentas one of the Presidents of the Council of State at the corona-tion of Charles X. In 1824, he received from the King ofFrance the decoration of Grand Officer of the Legion of Honour,and in 182G, the King of Wirtemberg, his former sovereign andhis early protector, testified his kind regard for M. Cuvier, andhis high estimation of his merits, by conferring upon him, ofhis own accord, the title of Commander of his Order of theCrown. When a Catholic Bishop was appointed chief of theUniversity in 1822, Cuvier received, in an independent form, thefunctions of Grand Master, with regard to the faculties ofProtestant Theology, and he still retains them, although, since1827, the Grand Masters have been laymen. And what givesM. Cuvier a preponderant influence in the nomination of theProtestant clergy, and in all that relates to the administrationof the Protestant churches and synagogues in France, is hisbeing entrusted, since 1827, with the direction, in the ministryof the interior, of all the ecclesiastical affairs not belonging tothe Catholic church.Such has been the political and scientific career of this dis-tinguished foreigner; and such are the writings he hasbequeathed to posterity,a career of usefulness worthy ofimitation, as his writings are deserving of the attentive study ofall who follow in the same track of science. Notwithstandingthe scientific achievements of this great man, which we haveattempted briefly to enumerate, no man by his comportmentappears to have achieved less. With wealth, influence, learn-ing and fame, M, Cuvier's easy and unaffected manners com-mand the love and esteem of all who have the honour to enjoyhis acquaintance. With a robust natural constitution, andmethod in all his undertakings, he achieves without exertionwhat would surpass the powers of ordinary men. Guided inhis arduous career by no other motive than the love of know-ledge and the desire to benefit his race, his labours for sciencemerit the gratitude, and will command the admiration of allposterity.