On the Structure and Nature of the Spongilla friabillis (1826) By ROBERT E. GRANT.THE Spongilla friabillis of Lamarck, belongs to a genus of organized bodies, whose internal structure and economy are still unknown, and which naturalists are at present undecided whether to place in the animal or in the vegetable kingdom. It is a fresh water production, of a green or grey colour, soft, fibrous, reticulate, friable texture, irregular flat spreading form, and strong fetid odour; it contains a turbid green-coloured gelatinous-like matter in its interstices, and erect branched fibres pass through its interior, arising from its base, and projecting from its surface. Lamarck has distinguished this from the only other known species, Sp. pidvinata and Sp. ramosa, chiefly by the marked appearance of these erect or longitudinal fibres, which are seen in dried specimens, rising, branching, and radiating towards the surface, and beyond it.This animal or vegetable production is found spreading on rocks or other solid bodies, at the bottom of lakes, or on the sides of stagnant pools, and has been observed in various parts of Europe,—in Russia by Pallas,—in Denmark by Muller,— in Sweden by Linnaeus,—in Germany by Gmelin, Blumenbach, and Schweigger,—in different parts of Great Britain and Ireland,—in France by Lamouroux; and probably it has not been looked for on other continents. It grows abundantly in Lochend near Edinburgh, where I have procured all the specimens for the experiments and observations detailed in this memoir; it is seen covering the surface of many of the rocks and stones on the east side of the lake, and enveloping the wooden posts at the north end of it, when the water is low in autumn; it spreads indiscriminately over every solid body it encounters, whether animal, vegetable, or mineral, and adheres so closely to them, that it cannot be separated without laceration. We observe it more frequently, and better developed, on the overhanging or perpendicular sides of solid bodies than on their acclivities or their summits; this has relation to the position of certain large orifices on its surface, to be noticed hereafter. Though of a very delicate and brittle nature, it thrives on the most exposed ridges and prominent angles of rocks, which is probably owing to its usual depth from the agitated surface, and to the sheltered condition of small lakes, compared with the open sea, where the marine sponges thrive best on the sheltered sides of rocks. When young, it appears in small, round, convex spots, of a light grey coloured, soft, downy, substance, adhering to the surface of stones under water, or spreading irregularly as a flat woolly covering of a light greenish-grey colour, having a line or two of thickness, and an extension of one or two inches. But as it advances in growth, it becomes more compact in texture, and of a darker sea-green colour, acquires a thickness of more than two inches, covers a continuous surface of several feet in length, sends up from every part of its surface irregular, short, compressed lobes, sharp ridges, thin laminae, or cylindrical, small branches, rounded at their extremities, and it presents numerous very distinct apertures, of different sizes, leading into its interior. From the looseness of its porous surface and internal texture, and from its mode of enveloping substances in the progress of its growth, we generally find in its interior portions of sand, mud, or gravel, shells of fresh water testacea, fragmeuts of roots or branches of trees, tubulariae, larvae, particularly of phryganeae, innumerable animalcules, and different kinds of ova.  In its living state, the Sp. jriablti* is so soft and brittle ihat it can scarcely be bandied or lifted without tearing, feels slightly unctuous between the fingers, has a strong disagreeable smell, like that of stagnant ditches in the heat of summer, tastes cooling without any marked flavour, and quickly diffuses among the saliva, leaving only some earthy particle between the teeth; it sinks slowly in water, appearing lighter than most marine sponges. When pressed, a thin slimy turbid greenish-coloured matter escapes, mixed with a considerable portion of water, and the remaining fibrous portion has a light grey colour, and stiff gritty feel. When allowed to putrefy in water, a thick, fatty layer covers the surface of the fluid, the water acquires a turbid yellowish colour, the spongilla becomes of a blackish-green hue, and emits a most offensive putrid animal odour, like that of the most putrid offals. A portion of it, whether fresh or putrid, placed on a red hot iron, smells like burning skin or membrane, the soft parts are dissipated, and the fibrous residue becomes red hot, but does not consume nor change much its form. The burnt remains of this substance do not effervesce in vinegar, nor in nitric, sulphuric, or muriatic acids, nor is their appearance in the least altered by these acids, nlthough they arc alleged by Lamouroux to contain more than half their bulk of lime. When the calcined remains, or even a portion of the fresh spongilla, are rubbed with a smooth, wooden, instrument on the polished surface of glass, they leave innumerable very minute permanent traces, which we observe, with the assistance of a lens, to be distinct streaks cut in the substance of the glass, thus indicating the presence of silica in the axis of this organized body. The soft green coloured matter contained so abundantly in this substance, in its living state, when mixed with water, and examined under the microscope, is found to consist almost entirely of minute, granular, transparent bodies, like the gelatinous matter of the marine sponge. The dried fibrous axis becomes of a pure white colour, and somewhat opaque, by a few minutes' exposure to the intense heat of the blowpipe, but does not melt nor lose its fibrous appearance; when a portion of the dried axis is rubbed on the back of the hand, it excites an itching pain, and inflamed spots with diffused redness, from its sharp spicula piercing the skin, and remaining in its substance. Numerous, small, yellow, globular bodies have been frequently observed in autumn, spread every where through the substance of the spongilla, and have greatly perplexed naturalists,—some considering them as the grains of this supposed plant, while others regard them as ova deposited there by some aquatic insects.Linnaeus, in his Flora Suecica (1180—1191), speaks of grains found in this fresh water plant in autumn, though in his later works he seems to consider these grains as foreign bodies, and the spongilla as a species of sponge. Lamarck and the Danish naturalist Vahl, considered the spongilla to be merely a habitation constructed by the cristatella. Montagu, in the Wertverian Transactions, considered it as a nidus formed by some aquatic insects, for the reception of their ova. Lichtenstein, in the Trans, of the Nat. Hist. Soc. of Copenhagen, describes it as an agglutinated mass of the tubes of fresh-water tubulariae, remaining empty after the death of the polypi, Pallas speaks of it as a shapeless mass, possessing no trace of life. Gmelin, like most of Lamarck's predecessors, places it in the genus Spongia, and he makes the singular remark respecting the friabilis, that k serves as food for fishes. Lamouroux, in 1816, was satisfied, from personal examination, that it is an animal resembling the group of true sponges; but in his Eapos. Method. 1821, he expresses himself convinced, from more recent observations, and particularly from the effects of light, heat, moisture, and air upon it, that it differs entirely from the marine sponge, and is merely a fresh-water plant. Lamarck slijl considers its animal nature as far from being established, and has removed it to a great distance from the marine sponge. In this country, some naturalists, as Dr Fleming, regard it as an animal distinct from the sponge, while others spend their ingenuity in endeavouring to prove it a vegetable. Schweigger has examined two species of spongilla alive, Sp. pulvinata and Sp. ramosa, and states that they possess a gelatinous crust, as distinct as that of many marine sponges, and truly belong to that genus of animals; while Blumenbach, who has performed many experiments on these substances in their living state at Gottingen, has not been able to discover a trace of animal nature in them, and believes them to be aquatic plants. But none of these writers have described to us its interna! organization, nor afforded sufficient data to enable us to decide either as to its animal or vegetable nature.The small, yellow, globular bodies observed by many naturalists in the Spongilla JriabUu in autumn, are distinctly visible to the naked eye, regularly spherical, about the size of grains of sand. Linnaeus compares them in size to the seeds of thyme, of a bright straw-yellow colour, rough on their external surface, yielding a little to pressure, and quite elastic. I have found them present, and almost equally abundant in the spongilla in September, October, November, December, January, and February, but have not yet examined this substance in other months, to discover at what season, if ever, they are deficient. They are distributed very irregularly, but abound most in the deeper parts, where they frequently lie loosely collected in groups of about twenty or thirty; they have no perceptible organic connection with each other, or with the substance in which they are imbedded. I have frequently found a portion of spongilla crowded with them, while another growing beside it contained none; and even the same portion sometimes presents them crowded in one place, while they are entirely wanting in another. The}' seem to have no proper cell or particular disposition of tlie spicula for their lodgement, but fall out readily when the broken substance is moved gently in water; and there appears to be no open passage leading to them from the 'surface, different from the canals natural to this organized body. When one of these round balls is pressed between the forceps, it yields with some resistance, bursts suddenly, and a white, semi-opaque, viscid matter is forced out. They produce no effervescence when thrown into nitric acid, no lime being contained in their tough cartilaginous capsules; the capsules frequently burst after remaining a minute or two in this acid, being contracted by it, like other horny or cartilaginous substances, before they dissolve. The yellow, elastic capsules, viewed separately Uirough the microscope, have a coarse, granular structure, and appear studded with transparent points, as if porous, but nothing is perceived to escape through them by pressure, till they burst. In bursting, I have several times observed the fluid contents force out a regular circular portion of the capsule. When these yellow globules arc exposed for a minute or two to the flame of a candle, they diminish to a third of their usual size, become quite black, shining, and smooth on the surface, empty within, and very brittle; this was observed before the time of Linnaeus. In this calcined state they produce no effervescence, and undergo no change in the strongest acids.The soft matter contained within these yellow spheres, consists of two or three hundred soft transparent gelatinous globules, adhering slightly together, and, when magnified by the microscope, very much resembling the spawn of a frog; there is likewise a small quantity of a thin colourless fluid, and some lively monades, as we find within the ova of most animals, but not, as far as I know, within the seeds of plants. When shaken gently in water, or allowed to remain a few minutes in. it, the transparent globules fall separate, and begin to dissolve; on examining them with the microscope when thus separated, we observe that each globule contains about a hundred very small white opaque particles, which lie close together on one side of the globule, and occupy about a third of its capacity. The transparent part of the globules quickly and entirely dissolves, and the white opaque bodies they contained are observed strewed over the bottom of the water, partly adhering in groups, and partly isolated. I have not observed any change in these white particles, after preserving them some time in water, though they seem to possess the power of slowly changing their positions, when attentively watched through the microscope.The yellow spheres whose contents have been described, did not undergo the slightest perceptible change in external appearance, or in the nature of their contained matter, during six weeks rest in rain water, frequently renewed, from the middle of October to the end of November, although the true ova of the spongilla were growing and spreading on watch-glasses immersed in the same vessel of water. And what appears a remarkable circumstance, whether these bodies be ova or grains, tbeir colour, size, structure, and contents, were precisely alike, during all the six months I have yet been able to examine the spongilla alive;—those taken from the spongilla in February presented the same appearances, externally and internally, as those of September. They differ from the ova of every marine sponge I have yet observed, in their strong cartilaginous capsulc, and soluble, gelatinous globules; they differ entirely in colour from the substance in which they are found, the spongilla being of a deep sea-green or grass-green colour, while they are of a lively straw-yellow; and they do not develope themselves into young spongillae, as some would lead us to suppose, in the same circumstances which evolve the true ova of that animal. Different kinds of these bodies appear to occur in the freshwater sponge Linnanis describes them as shining, bluish globules, about the size of a grain of thyme, in the Spongia lacustris (Spongilla ramosa, Lamarck), and as green gelatinous grains in the Spongia fluviatilis (Spongillapidvinata, Lamarck). Lamarck states, that small, yellow, gelatinous grains are found in all the species. Those found in the Spongilla friab'il'ts of Lochend are tough, hard, yellow spheres, filled with transparent, soluble, gelatinous globules. Lichtenstein considered them as the ova of the Tubularia sultana, Blumenbach, as appears from Schweiggcrs account of his MS., although he is represented by the French writers as having mistaken them for the germs of the cristatella. From the doubtful nature of these bodies, and their appearing in the same state of development for at least six successive months, their existence in the spongilla cannot with propriety be adduced in proof of this substance being a plant, as is done by Lamouroux and others, nor to prove it an animal, as was formerly done by Lamouroux, and is at present by Lamarck.The external surface of the spongilla, like that of the marine sponge, is covered with numerous, open pores leading into its interior. The pores are mentioned by Linnaeus and Gmelin in two of the species, Sp. lacustris and Sp. JhiviatUis. They are so conspicuous on the surface of the Spongilla pvlvinata, that Lamarck has introduced them into the definition of that species. On the surface of the recent Spongilla friabilis they are visible at the distance of twenty inches, and are quite distinct from the large apertures seen between the lobes and branches, which have probably alone been observed. They are distributed irregularly over the whole surface, and are surrounded by projecting, naked fibres, very distinct in this species. They appear open, round, and smooth on their margins, though they are easily obliterated by handling this delicate substance, or by the natural collapse of their very soft margins. By placing a thin layer, cut from the surface under the microscope, we perceive that each pore, besides its projecting defending fasciculi, has its margin supported by loose spicula lying parallel with the surface, and placed round the opening. The bounding fasciculi of the pores consist of so few spicula, and these are so loosely connected together, that the whole surface wants the compactness which they produce in the marine sponges. These openings are not'the cells of polypi, nor can we discover by the microscope any trace of ciliae on their margins; but their whole internal parietes are closely covered by the same minute, granular bodies which line the pores and canals of the marine sponge; and on viewing these bodies sideways, we observe that they project from the margins towards the centre of the openings, more distinctly than in most of the latter zoophytes. By examining their horizontal sections taken successively from the same part of the spongilla we discover that its pores are only the open entrances to canals which meander through the body, enlarging in their diameter as they proceed, till they again reach the surface. The wide extremities of the canals are the fecal orifices, which are seen of uncommon magnitude, opening on the depressed parts of the surface between the lobes. The granular bodies which line the whole of these canals from the pores to the fecal orifices, are connected with each other, and with the parietes, by means of a very soft, transparent, green-coloured, glistening matter. There are obviously fewer granular bodies on the surface of this gelatinous matter at the fecal orifices than elsewhere; and when we examine it with highly magnifying powers in that situation, it appears quite homogeneous, without fibre or grain in its texture. The internal canals are every where bounded and supported by the longitudinal fibres, and by single transverse spicula, which pass across from one fasciculus to another ; at the extremities of the canals the projecting, erect, longitudinal fibres have a slight convergence, both around the pores and fecal orifices. The single transverse spicula which bind together the longitudinal fibres, are almost invisible to the naked eye; hence in dried specimens of the Spongilla frlabilis, the whole skeleton appears to be composed solely of longitudinal fasciculi, rising from the base, and branching towards the surface. These two kinds of fibres are connected with, and almost imbedded in, the glistening matter lining the canals, and they assist, by their natural curvatures, in giving a roundness to these passages. The fecal orifices, in this species, are never raised to the extremities of projecting papillae, and have no regularity ot form, size, or distribution. They may be compared with those of the Spongiapanicea, preferring to open on the deeper parts of the surface; and, like that sponge, this substance thrives best where its free surface hangs down in a vertical position, as when it spreads on the overhanging sides of rocks, or on the under surface of wooden planks.From this striking resemblance in structure and general appearance between the spongilla and the marine sponges, a resemblance which probably I would never have detected in this soft substance, without adopting every precaution which experience had shewn to be necessary in the examination of the latter zoophytes, I was naturally led to expect the samp currents through its internal canals which are so obvious and well known in the true sponge. The shaking of this brittle zoophyte in carrying portions of it from tlic lake to be examined under the microscope in my apartment, injured so much the organization of its soft parts, as to baffle my first attempts to discover its currents. At length, however, I succeeded by examining portions of it on the side of the lake, the instant they were cut from the rocks. On placing an entire portion of it perpendicularly in a glass of clear water, and in perfect rest, I observed, with a lens, through the sides of the vessel, not only particles of matter driven with rapidity from the large openings between the lobes and ridges, but likewise floating particles distinctly drawn in through the lesser openings, distributed on the elevated parts of the surface. I afterwards succeeded several times in preserving such portions of it as had lobes or branches projecting from their surface, so entire as to exhibit their currents in my apartment for nine hours, after their removal from the rocks. On cutting off these uninjured lobes, and placing them successively under the microscope in a watch-glass with rain-water, I observed the same regular and constant streams from the small fecal orifices placed at different distances along their surface, the same feculent matter accompanying the streams, and the same motionless state of the mass during their flow, which arc observed in the marine sponges. The pores of the lobes are nearly as large as their fecal orifices, and currents are as distinctly seen flowing into them as i'rom the latter openings. I have not been able to excite this substance to any kind of spontaneous motion, and Blumenbach seems to have been as unsuccessful with those he experimented on at Gdttengen; nor have I found any difference of temperature between it and the medium in which it lives.  The fibres forming the axis of the Sp. friabilis consist of minute siliceous spicula, which are as regular and constant in their .iforms as the ultimate crystals of a mineral, or the spicula of other zoophytes, and might, like these, be employed to distinguish known species, or to discover new. When ^reexamine a thin layer of the recent spongilla under the microscope, we observe the spicula placed like a frame-work round all the openings, in the order best calculated to prevent these passages from changing their dimensions. By agitating a portion of it in water they fall asunder, and may be procured separate from the soft parts, but not in so pure a state as when they are obtained through the medium of acids. On allowing a portion of spongilla to remain for a short time in a watch-glass with nitric, sulphuric, or muriatic acid, the animal matter dissolves, and the siliceous spicula cover the bottom of the glass like minute shining crystals. They may now be washed, and their symmetrical forms examined under the microscope; or they may be dried between plates of glass, or thin scales of mica, and thus preserved for examination or comparison at any future period. In this species, the spicula have all the same form, and are mostly of one size. From this circumstance, and from the well-marked characters of the Sp. friabilis, and its abundance in most inland countries, its spicula may be adopted as a convenient and fixed standard of comparison for the description and measurement of the spicula of every other zoophyte.They are transparent, colourless, cylindrical, very slightly and regularly curved, pointed at both ends, tubular, hard, and brittle. They scratch glass, suffer no change in nitric acid, become inflated like a bottle, and burst by the sudden action of the blowpipe ; do not alter their forms in the least by drying, and do not consume by heat. In their moist state they have a shining, vitreous lustre, and appear through the microscope as if solid and homogeneous throughout; but, on being heated or dried, ihey lose their lustre, become less transparent, and of a greyish-white colour, and a distinct cavity is observed within them, extending from one point to the other, and occupying about half of their diameter. From the appearance of the sharp points at the extremities of their axis, and from their bodies inflating and bursting by sudden heat, their internal cavity seems to be completely cloned at both ends; ami- from the homogeneous and solid appearance of the spicula in their natural state, they seem to be then filled with a soft matter, decreasing in density from the circumference to the axis, which may contribute to their strength and flexibility. When we place any object, measuring half a line in length, among these spicula under the microscope, we perceive that it requires lour of them to extend the same length as that object; thus shewing each spiculum to be the eighth of a line, or eightieth of an inch in length, and their diameter measured iu the same way, is about the fourth of that of a human hair. As the spicula of this zoophyte are of a middle size, between the large and the minute, their dimensions might be assumed MS unity in the measurement of other spicula; and from the constancy of the forms, and dimensions of these elementary parts of the skeleton, their description would form an important character in the definition of every zoophyte possessed of spicula.Each longitudinal fasciculus, which appears lo the naked eye as a single fibre, is composed of about ten spicula adhering closely together in a body, a like number being added to their extremities to an indefinite length. These spicula adhere to each other throughout their whole length, and are not easily separated by agitation, or by repeated maceration in hot-water; but their connecting matter is quickly dissolved in strong acids, which might lead us to believe, that, it differs from the common gelatinous matter of the spongiila. The waving direction of these fasciculi is produced by the curves of one set of spicula being turned ojv posite to the curves of the next adjoining, and so on in a continued scries. The single transverse spicula, which connect the longitudinal fibres together, generally pierce completely through these strong groups, to secure a firmer adhesion. The forms and nature of the ultimate spicuia, and the general construction of the skeleton I have always found to be the same, whatever might be the external appearance or age of the spongilla, or the part of the lake from which it was procured. The curves of the spicula have a relation to the rotundity of the canals and openings, and their sharp points relate to their 1'unction of defending these passages. The whole arrangement of the spicula, around the canals, shows that these are not accidental passages, formed by worms or aquatic insects in a vegetable substance, and helps to prove, that its currents are not produced by any foreign intruders, though this substance is infested with myriads of ciliated animalcules, which are constantly producing currents to attract their prey. In place of the phosphate of lime of the higher orders of animals, or the carbonate of lime of the lower orders, we have seen that silica is the earthy matter of the skeleton of this zoophyte. The same is the case with most of the British marine sponges, and with some zoophytes which possess polypi. This earth is secreted by many plants, but I am not aware that it has been observed in the form of symmetrical, tubular spicula, composing the axis of any substance in the vegetable kingdom. .' . .'By a little agitation in water, the gelatinous matter of the spongilla resolves itself almost entirely into minute, pellucid, greencoloured granules, which have a singular tendency to reunite. When allowed to remain for a few hours at rest, they unite into a compact, dark green, velvety membrane, perfectly resembling the Ostillatoria viridis, Vauch. and attach themselves to the bottom of the vessel. When a few of them are placed in a watchglass with water, they form themselves into minute spheres, being constantly rolled to and fro by the animalcules, from which it is nearly impossible to free this substance. The minutest of the granular bodies, when viewed through the microscope, are seen to hare a distinct power of loco-motion. Their slow motions in this separate state, are probably produced by the same organs which they employ to produce the currents, when attached to the sides of the canals. The soft matter of the spongilla docs not seem to possess a distinct membranous coat, but is a little more consistent, and has a glistening surface, wherever it is in contact with the element in which it lives, as within the canals, and on the outer surface of the body. We observe minute portions of the gelatinous matter assuming naturally a sphericar form, within the living spongilla, in the parenchymatous soft substance, between the internal canals. They appear to be the ova or germs of this substance,—they contain no spicula,—and the microscope detects nothing in their structure but transparent granular bodies, like those lining the canals, connected together by gelatinous, homogeneous matter. During October and November, several of these spherical, translucent, greyish-green coloured globules, attached themselves to the bottom of watchglasses, in which I had placed broken portions of spongilla, and when fixed, they spread, and exhibited the same phenomena of growth, presented under similar circumstances by the ova of the marine sponge. They are not quite so large as the yellow cartilaginous balls of the spongilla, above described; and, when they first lose their spherical form, and begin to spread on the glass as a thin, transparent film, we distinctly perceive, even with a single lens, that they contain no spiculum. With the microscope we can observe the position, size, and form of each spiculum, as they successively make their appearance in the spreading circular film. The spicula first formed were generally two or three, lying close and parallel to each other, and extending from the centre towards the margin of the ovum. Afterwards, I observed single spicula make their appearance, quite isolated, in different parts of the ovum, and often at right angles to the radius of the place where they lay. The radiating double spicula aie probably the beginnings of the longitudinal, erect fascicula; and the others the single transverse spicula. The spicula first formed in the ovum have the same form as the adult spicula, and appear greatly disproportioned to the small size of the ovum. I have never observed a spiculum enlarge by growth, after being once formed. The ovum, in spreading, changes its circular form for an oblong or irregular outline, but its spreading margins are always surrounded with a very thin homogeneous film, while its granular bodies and spicula occupy chiefly the convex middle part. I have observed, however, spicula quite isolated make their appearance in the spreading marginal film. None of the spicula arc ever observed to shoot their points naturally through the surface, or beyond the margin of the ovum; although the slight agitation of changing its water from time to time, soon causes many of them, already formedwithin the ovum, to project beyond its surface. This renders it probable that all the spicula, even the naked groups, projecting round the pores and orifices, were originally formed within the surface of the soft matter. Analogy leaves no doubt, that these ova or spherical portions of gelatinous matter, when ready to separate from the parietes of the canals, are delivered by the currents through the large fecal orifices as in the marine sponges; but I have not detected any ciliae on their surface, nor seen them swim about by their own spontaneous motions, like many marine ova, before fixing themselves. The ova were nourished only with rain water, while the spicula were successively forming in their interior; which shows that these simple gelatinous globules, in which neither vessel nor fibre are discernible, have the power of secreting siliceous tubes from that pure element. The Spongilla friabidis has thus a close resemblance to the marine sponge in its siliceous spicula, gelatinous matter, granular bodies, pores, internal canals, fecal orifices, currents, feculent matter, and general mode of growth, whether in the state of an ovum, or in the adult state; and, as the transition from the sponge to the Alcyonium by a new genus has been shown elsewhere, we have thus a regular and beautiful gradation from this simple substance, to the most complex polypiferous zoophytes. Although in every respect a sponge, it has a more imperfect structure than any of the marine species, which is observable in the sameness and feeble attachment of the spicula, in the great size and defenceless state of the pores and fecal orifices, in the general looseness of its surface and internal texture, —in the softness of its gelatinous matter,—in the want of cilise and spicula in its ova, indeed in every individual character. From this greater simplicity of structure, we are forcjd to consider it as more ancient than the marine sponges, and most probably their original parent; and, as its descendants have greatly improved their organization, during the many changes that have taken place in the composition of the ocean, while the spongilla, living constantly in the same unaltered medium, has retained its primitive simplicity, it is highly probable that the vast abyss, in which the spongilla originated and left its progeny, was fresh, and has gradually become saline, by the matt rials brought to it by rivers, like the salt lakes of Persia and Siberia. The want of contractile power in this zoophyte, and the absence of all organs for seizing prey, show that it is nourished only by the particles of organic matter suspended in water, or by the elements of that fluid, which is further indicated by the constant streams through its body, and by the development of its ova, when supported only with rain water. The great looseness and softness of its texture, and the width and defenceless condition of its openings, which now render the spongilla a safe retreat, and a convenient magazine of food for myriads of animalcules and aquatic insects, and a fit receptacle for their ova, obscurely indicate the unpeopled state of the waters of the globe, and consequent absence of these numerous assailants, at the period of the first formation of this zoophyte; and its aptness for secreting silica, and the abundance of that earth in its skeleton, show the period of its creation to have been nearly synchronous with that of the siliceous or primitive rocks. 