General Observations on the former and present Geological Condition of the Countries discovered by Captains Parry and Ross. By Professor JAMESON (1827)THE observations made during the four Arctic Expeditions, viz. that under Captain Ross, and the three under Captain Parry, afford the following general facts and inferences:1. That the regions explored abound in primitive and transition rocks; that, although the secondary rocks occupy considerable tracts, still their extent is more limited than that of the older formations; that the alluvial deposites are not extensive; that true or modern volcanic rocks were nowhere met with; and that the only traces of the tertiary strata were found in the sandstones and clays connected with the secondary traps of Baifin’s Bay. _2. That the primitive and transition islands were, in all probability, at one time connected together, and formed a continuous mass with the continental parts of America; and that, in the plains and hollows of this land were deposited the secondary limestones, sandstones, gypsum, and‘ coal, and upon these again the tertiary rocks.3. That, after the deposition of these secondary and tertiary rocks, the land appears to have been broken up, and reduced either suddenly or by degrees, or partly by sudden and violent action, and partly by the long continued agency of the atmosphere and the ocean, into its present insular and peninsular form; and that, consequently, the secondary and tertiary formations were formerly, in those regions, more extensively distributed than they are at present.4. That, previous to the deposition of the coal-formation, as that of Melville Island, the transition and primitive hills and 0 plains supported a. rich and luxuriant vegetation, principally of cryptogamous ‘plants, especially the ferns, the prototypes of which are now met with only in the tropical regions of the earth. The fossil corals of the secondary limestones also intimate, that before, during, and after, the deposition of the coalformation, the waters of the ocean were so constituted as to support polyparia, closely resembling those of the present equatorial seas.5. That, previous to, and during, the deposition of the tertiary strata, these now frozen regions supported forests of dicotyledonous plants, as is shewn by the fossil dicotyledonous woods met with in connection with these strata in Balin’s Bay, and by the fossil wood of Melville Island, Cape York, and Byam Martin Island.6. That the boulders or rolled blocks met with in different quarters, and in tracts distant from their original localities, afford evidence of the passage of water across them, and at a period subsequent to the deposition of the newest solid “strata, namely, those of the tertiary class.7. That nowhere are there any discoverable traces of the agency of modern volcanoes; and we may add, that, in the Arctic Regions, the only appearances of this kind are those in J an, Mayen’s Island, described by Scoresby.8. That the only intimations of older volcanic action are those afforded by the presence of secondary trap-rocks, such as basalt, greenstone, trap-tufia, and amygdaloid.9. That the black bituminous coal, the coal of the oldest coalformation, which some speculators maintain to be confined to the more temperate and warmer regions of the earth, is now proved, by its discovery in Melville Island, far to the west, and in Jameson’s Land, far to the east, in Old Greenland, to form an interesting and important feature in the geognostical constitution of arctic countries.10. That the red sandstone of Possession Bay, &c. renders it probable that rock-salt may occur in that quarter.11. That, although no new metalliferous compounds have occurred to gratify the curiosity of the mineralogist, yet the regions explored by Captain Parry have afforded various interesting and highly useful ones, such as octahedral or magnetic iron-ore, rhomboidal or red iron-ore, prismatic or brown iron-ore, and prismatic chrome-ore, or chromate of iron'; also the common ore of copper, or copper pyrites; molybdena glance, or sulphuret of molybdena; ore of titanium ; and that interesting and valuable mineral, graphite or black lead.12. That the gems, the most valued and most beautiful of mineral substances, are not wanting in the Arctic Regions visited by the Expeditions, is proved by the great abundance of the precious garnet, which we doubt not will be found, on more particular examination of the primitive rocks, to present all the beautiful colours and elegant forms for which it is so much admired. Rock-crystal, another of the gems, was met with, and also beryl and zircon. 13. That these newly-discovered lands exhibit the same general geognostical arrangements as occur in all other extensive tracts of country hitherto examined by the naturalist; a fact which strengthens that opinion which maintains that the grand features of nature, in the mineral kingdom, are every where similar, and, consequently, that the same general agencies must have prevailed generally during the formation of the solid mass of the earth.14. Lastly, That the apparent irregularities which, at first sight, present themselves to our attention, in the grand arrangements in the mineral kingdom, are the offspring of our own feeble powers of observation, and disappear when the phenomena are examined in all their relations. It is then, indeed, that the mind obtains those enduring and sublime views of the Deity, which, in geology, reward the patient observer, raise one of the most beautiful and interesting departments of natural science to its true rank, and prove that its relations connect. as it were, in the scale of magnitude, the phenomena of the earth with those more extensive arrangements presented to our intelligence in the planetary system, and in the grand frame-work of the universe itself.  