On Formations. By Robert JamesonON  a general view of the materials and structure of the crust of the earth, we are struck with the simplicity of the whole. Not more than 250 species of simple minerals have hitherto been discovered; and if we abstract the metalliferous, saline, and inflammable species, there remain not more than 134 species of earthy minerals. Still, with this small number of species, nature might have formed many hundred distinct, compound, and simple rocks; but it is otherwise. She employs almost exclusively a few species in the composition of all the rocks, both simple and compound, of which the crust of the earth is composed. Felspar, quartz, mica, minerals of the hornblende family, and limestone, are the most frequent and abundant: of these nearly the whole crust of the earth is composed: thus granite, gneiss, mica slate, clay slate, gabbro, porphyry, sienite, greenstone, basalt, serpentine, sandstone, are composed of one or more of the four first mentioned substances ; and the various, primitive, transition, and floetz limestones, that often form extensive ranges of mountain and tracts of country, are composed of carbonate of lime. Indeed, all the species of mountain rocks, at present known, do not exceed 50 or 60; and amongst these are several enumerated in the list of simple earthy minerals. Some mineralogists have considered them as more numerous; and have described every variety of composition as a distinct species, and in place of 50 or 60 species have enumerated several hundred. But the greater number of these are mere varieties of the common mountain rocks, of limited extent, often not exceeding a few fathoms in length and breadth. This error is owing to a misconception of what is understood by a mountain rock. A mountain rock is distinguished by its position in regard to other rocks, its magnitude, under which I include its length, breadth, and thickness, in the tract where it occurs, and the proportion and kind of minerals of which it is composed. Viewing them in this manner, it is not sufficient that they exhibit varieties in structure or composition, they must also have a determinate position and considerable magnitude, and the certainty of the distinction is augmented if they possess universality of distribution. Most of the mountain rocks are universally distributed: thus the compound rock, known under the name granite, and which is so abundant in Europe, occurs in China and Van Diemen’s Land, at the Cape of Good Hope and in Bengal, in Brazil, Mexico, and Canada; and in all these countries it has the same characters. From this fact it follows that we can with confidence draw inferences in regard to the geognostic characters of rocks in one country from what has been observed in another, and consider these as Applicable, on a general view, to the whole crust of the earth. Experience does not contradict this inference; on the contrary, it is confirmed by the investigations of geognosts in the most distant countries. This universality of the distribution of formations, consequently of the laws of the formation of the earth, has procured for geognosy a place amongst the physical sciences; and in it lies that which leads so irresistibly to geognostic investigations, as soon as we begin to occupy ourselves with the study of this branch of knowledge. It would wear out the patience of the most persevering inquirer, and would convey no very satisfactory information of a new set of rocks, or a new arrangement, if those already known were to. be studied in every small tract of country. We might as well pretend to arrange and number the grains of sand en the sea shore. In every country of considerable extent we find the outline of the structure of the whole globe. Some series of rocks, however, do not possess this universality; they appear in bason-shaped hollows, or in countries that have been formerly in the state of lakes, or in level plains resting on alluvial matters: their extent is, comparatively, inconsiderable; and all the phenomena they present attest the partiality of their deposition. We cannot, from there appearances, infer any thing in regard to the general structure of the earth ; and however interesting they may appear to us, it would lead to erroneous views were we to deduce from them general inferences in regard to the structure of the earth ;for every general inference of this kind from a local appearance must be false. These series of, rocks, to distinguish them from the more widely distributed or universal, are denominated partial or local formations. This interesting division was first pointed out by Werner. He was led to it by the examination of a series of rocks at Wehrau, in, Lusatia. To the common observer these rocks might have passed for members of the universal series; but his judgment and penetration led him to ascertain that their characters were of such a nature as to afford proofs of the existence of a kind of formation of solid rocks hitherto unsuspected. The idea was not lost with him; for he inferred that such formations would be found in other similar situations, and that the bottoms of lakes the sides of rivers, &c. would frequently present appearances of this kind. These local formations arc less striking in low and flat countries than in mountainous regions—where they are contained in valleys and their boundaries strongly marked. Hence we must be careful, in describing the rocks of low and flat countries, not to confound partial or local with universal formations.The celebrated Von Buch, in one of the late numbers of the magazine published by the Society of the Friends of Natural History in Berlin, describes an uncommonly interesting local formation which he discovered at Locle, in the district of Jura. It is contained in a high enclosed valley, situated I665 Fr. feet above the level of the lake of Neufchatel, and 2959 Fr. feet above the level of the sea. The valley, and the strata it contains, are about two miles and a quarter long, and about a mile broad. It is surrounded with high mountains of white compact limestone; -and its bottom is of the same species of rock. It is completely inclosed; and the water that falls in it escapes by subterraneous unknown canals. These canals may have opened for the first time not many centuries ago, before which period the whole valley of Locle must have been a lake. Even still the canals are so narrow that the valley is frequently overflowed: this circumstance induced the inhabitants in the year 1802 to cut long levels into the sides of the bounding mountains, in order to permit the water to escape into the lower valleys. This undertaking succeeded completely. The valley contains many small hills, from 200 to 300 feet high. The lowest stratum of these hills, which rests immediately on the limestone, is a very coarse conglomerate of masses of the Neighbouring limestone. On it rests a pretty thick bed of marly limestone, which has a white colour, is fine, earthy, and almost friable. Throughout its whole extent it is intermixed with small river shells, which still retain their natural shell. Small reeds also occur every where in this bed. It is the most characteristic and extensive rock of the whole formation. In the middle of it we meet with beds of smoke-grey hornstone, which has a fine splintery, or imperfect conchoidal fracture. These beds are the more remarkable, from the circumstance of siliceous beds occurring very rarely in the limestone of Jura; and when they do appear, are never so pure and distinct as in the partial formation of Locle. The same species of fresh water shells as occur in the marly limestone, also appear in the hornstone: amongst these can be distinguished the Helix cornua, a species frequent in the Lower Rhine, but which has not hitherto been found in Switserland. Below the hornstone lies a bed of opal, which is of a brownish black colour, glistening lustre, and perfect conchoidal fracture. This, Von Buch observes, is a remarkable production to be formed in the water of a lake; and is, in his opinion, a hornstone coloured with the coally matter of decayed vegetables. To this opal succeeds a bed of bituminous shale, which contains many impressions of reeds; and next, a bed of coal, including numerous bivalve shells. This coal burns badly; yet it is used by blacksmiths, when a strong fire Is required. These beds are in general but a few inches thick, but alternate two or three times as we descend; and it is said they sometimes attain the thickness of two feet. The whole of these minerals are the produce of a small inclosed lake; for not a trace of these rocks is to be seen beyond the mountains that surround Locle. We thus see what lakes have produced hills of 300 feet in height, and compact siliceous beds which are almost crystalized. Indeed, crystals of quartz sometimes occur in the fissure Of the hornstone. Another very curious local formation occurs at Eningen, on the Rhine. The remarkable limestone rocks of that spot have long engaged the particular attention of mineralogists. The celebrated quarries of Eningen were said to contain organic remains from every quarter of the globe, and in them it was supposed we could read the whole history of the earth. The acute and learned Blumenbach, however, after examining this formation, conjectured that it was of very new date; that it was formed by one of those partial local revolutions which, according to him, have taken place since what he calls the last general catastrophe which our earth has experienced. Von Buch is of opinion that it is a local formation, a deposition which had taken place in a previously existing lake from the rivers and rivulets having deposited slime from the adjacent, country over fishes, insects, leaves, and other organic bodies, and gradually enveloped them in thin beds of mud : probably long after these places were inhabited ; probably even after the erection of the neighbouring churches and cloisters. Similar depositions take place at this day in limestone countries where calcareous tuff is formed ; and it is well known that in the Travertine rock of Rome, a formation of the latest period, we find leaves, &c. of the various trees which now grow in the adjacent country. This very probable opinion of Von Buch is founded on the excellent description of Eningen, published by Dr. Karg, of Constance, which contains the first accurate view of the country of  The petrifactions are contained in a slaty limestone of loose texture. It extends about a mile in length, and fills a hollow in the limestone rocks, and not a trace of it is to be seen in the neighbouring country. The valley appears to have emptied itself at no very remote period, and left exposed at its bottom the limestone slate of Eningen.Dr. Karg gives an accurate and interesting systematic catalogue of all the petrifactions hitherto found in this limestone, and shows how observers have been deceived, particularly when they imagined that they had before them American and Indian, even entirely unknown organic forms ; and declares, after a careful and accurate examination of many hundred petrifactions, that he is not inclined to consider any of them as exotic. Indeed, we cannot but consider this opinion as well founded, when we attend to the many remarkable histories given by Dr. Karg of Eningen petrifactions. Thus Scheuchzer’s Homo diluvii testis which probably lived at a later period than the building of the neighbouring cloisters of Petershausen, even during Scheuchzer’s life-time, was by himself admitted to be but a quadruped. An exotic porpoise, under the hands of Dr. Karg, proved to be the common pole-cat ; and the shoots and leaves of the vine, which Walch describes as occurring in this limestone, pro\e to be nothing more than branches of the black poplar. Among the great number of bivalve shells that occur in the slate of Eningen, Dr. Karg did not find a single species of marine origin ; all were of fresh water growth. He also found that all the roots, woods, and leaves, that are inclosed in this rock, belong to some of the vegetable species that now grow in the vicinity. He found very distinct specimens of the branches, leaves, and nuts of the walnut tree (Juglan Regia). But it is said that the walnut tree was imported from Armenia into Italy, and from thence distributed over Germany. This interesting fact, Von Buch remarks, leads us very near to the period when the Eningen petrifactions took place, and renders it probable that the formation is of very recent date.What then can we deduce from the emptying of a lake, and the operations that took place at its bottom, in regard to the structure of the earth and its history? We learn nothing more than what took place where the lake was situated.Even supposing the lake to have been of considerable extent, still what took place within it could not afford us general laws, such as we obtain by considering the universal formations, as clay slate, grey wacke, gneiss, mica slate, &c.The formation of  Eningen, as Von Buch well remarks, affords a most striking example of the necessity and importance of distinguishing general from partial or local formations. Had naturalists known that the limestone slate of Eningen was a local formation, we should not have had so many erroneous views and absurd inferences drawn from the petrifactions it contains.Another set of formations, which of late has excited much attention, shall next be noticed. It is the series of new floetz rocks around Paris, and which is by some naturalists, although probably incorrectly, conjectured to be a partial or local deposite. When I first turned my attention to the descriptions of this tract of country contained in the Continental Journals, I was led to conclude that it differed from any of those contained in the arrangement of Werner, and stated it, as my opinion, that it appeared to be of comparatively recent origin. This inference, the truth of which has been demonstrated by the observations of Cuvier and Brongniart, I was enabled to make by applying the principles of the Wernerian geognosy to the accounts that had been published. From these it appeared that this tract of country was composed of alternate beds of sand, clay, marl, earthy soft limestone, sandstone, and gypsum; in which were contained numerous petrifactions of quadrupeds, birds, and other organic remains. Now as Werner has ascertained that the older formations are compact and solid, the newer in general loose and earthy; further, that remains of quadrupeds and birds occur only in the newer formations; I concluded, from the looseness of the texture of the Parisian strata, and their containing remains of quadrupeds and birds, that very probably they belonged to a new formation, or formations, more ancient than the oldest alluvial deposite, but newer than chalk.  It would appear from the late observations of Cuvier and Brongniart in their "Essai sur La Geographic Mineralogique dcs Environs de Paris," that the rocks of these formations are deposited in a hollow or bason of chalk, which forms the fundamental rock, or immediate basis of the district. These formations, according to the French naturalists, arc 11 in number, viz.:— 1. Chalk; 2. Plastic clay; 3. Coarse limestone; 4. Siliceous limestone 5. Gypsum, of the first fresh water formation; 6. Marine marl; 7- Sand and sandstone, without shells; 8. Sandstone, of marine formation; 9. Millstone, without shells ; 10. Second fresh water formation of marl and millstone; 11. Alluvial.  1. Chalk.—The chalk, which is the oldest and lowest member of the series, contains a considerable number of petrifactions: •of these the most characteristic is the belemnite : 22 species of petrifactions are enumerated, but not one of these has been discovered in the superincumbent formations.  2. Plastic clay.—This clay varies in purity: the lower bed is the purest, and contains no petrifactions : the upper bed, that next the limestone, is sandy, of a blackish colour, and sometimes contains organic remains, it varies in thickness, from 17 yards to a few inches. It is distinctly separated from the chalk. There is no transition from the one into the other; on the contrary, the clay contains fragments of the chalk, a proof that the chalk must have been consolidated before the clay.  3. Coarse limestone, and its marine shell sandstone. —This rock rests on the clay; but it does not every where immediately rest en it, being sometimes separated by a bed of sand, varying in thickness. The lower bed of limestone is mixed with sand; sometimes, indeed, contains more sand than lime. This limestone formation is composed of alternate beds of coarse limestone more or less pure, clay marl, very thin slaty close marl, -and calcareous marl, all arranged in a regular and determinate order. It is filled with petrifactions: of these upwards of 600 have been already described by La Marsk and others. The lowest beds contain petrifactions that do not occur in the middle beds: and in the middle beds we meet with petrifactions that are wanting in the upper beds. It also appears that the number of petrifactions diminish as we approach to the uppermost beds, when they entirely disappear. The middle and upper beds of limestone contain beds of sandstone and hornstone filled with marine shells ; and the sandstone sometimes contains both fresh •water and marine shells.  4. Siliceous limestone.—This formation is composed of strata of limestone, penetrated with silica. It is often cavernous, and the cavities are lined in some instances with siliceous stalactites and crystals of quartz. It contains no organic remains. In this formation occurs one variety of the mineral called buhrstone, used for millstones. The authors of the essay are of opinion that the buhrstone is the siliceous skeleton of a limestone: the quartz being deprived by some unknown cause of its lime, there remains now a porous mass, very hard, and containing in its cavities a clay marl.5 & 6. Gypsum of the fir it fresh water formation, and marine murl.—The gypsum rests on the siliceous limestone. The formation, however, is not entirely gypseous; but consists of alternate beds of that mineral and of calcareous and argillaceous We have an excellent example of this formation at Mont Martrc. There we observe three masses of gypsum. First Mass. Rests on the limestone. The lowest part is composed of alternate thin beds of gypsum, including crystals of selenite, and solid calcareous marl, and very thin slaty clay marl. In the gypsum large lenticular crystals of gypsum occur, and in the marl menclite. The gypsum contains sometimes fresh water, sometimes marine shells.—Second Mass. In this mass the strata of gypsum are thicker than in the preceding, and the beds of marl less numerous. In the clay marl petrified fishes occur, and also masses of sulphate of strontian.—Third Mass. This is the thickest of the three masses, being in some places 30 metres thick. It contains but few beds of marl. The lowest strata of this mass contain silex impregnated with the gypseous matter. The intermediate strata are divided into large columns. The upper beds are penetrated with marl, and also alternate with it. It contains in general five beds of marl. It is in this third mass that the remains of unknown quadrupeds and birds are found. To the north of Paris these petrifactions occur in the gypsum; but to the south, often in the beds of marl that alternate with the gypsum. This gypsum also contains bones of the tortoise, and skeletons of fish, and also fresh water shells. This third mass is essentially characterised by the presence of the skeletons of quadrupeds. These remains serve to determine it when it occurs isolated, for no such remains have hitherto been found in the lower masses. Above the gypsum occur thick beds of calcareous and argillaceous marls. It is in the calcareous marl that we meet with trunks of palm-trees penetrated with silica. In the same beds there occur shells of the genera planorbis and limneus, that scarcely differ from those that live in our marshes. These petrifactions are alleged to prove that these marls are of fresh water origin, like the gypsum on which they rest; and it is remarked that the gypsum, the beds of marl that occur in it, and those that cover it, constitute the first or oldest fresh water formation of the Parisian series of rocks. Above these marls we observe numerous and often thick beds of argillaceous and calcareous marls. They contain no petrifaction, and the formation to which they belong has not been determined. Above these we meet with a yellowish slaty marl, which towards its lower part contains balls of sulphate of strontian, and a little above a thin bed of small bivalve shells belonging to the genus cytherea. It is said that it serves as the limit of the fresh water formation, and marks the beginning of a new marine formation. In short, all the shells we find above it are marine. It is about a metre thick, and contains in its upper layers also cerites, spirobesx and bones of fish. Over this rests a thick bed of green marl. It contains no petrifactions, but nodula of sulphate of strontian. Four or five beds of marl succeed the green marl, and appear to contain no petrifactions; but these beds are covered with a bed of yellowish argillaceous marl, which is filled with fragments of sea shells of the genera cerita, trochus, mactra, venus, caniutrn, &c.; also fragments of the palate of two species of ray. The beds of marl that succeed these contain principally bivalve marine shells ; and in the latter beds, those immediately under the argillaceous sand, contain two beds of oysters. These oysters appear to have lived in the p)ace where we now find them, for they are united together as in the sea; the greater number are quite entire; and if we extract them with care, we find that the greater number h-we both valves. The gypsum formation is often terminated by a mass, more or less thick, of argillaceous sand without shells.  7- Sand and sandstone without shells.—The sandstone without shells is one of the last formations. It constantly covers those already described.  8. Upper marine sand and sandstone.—This is termed the last marine formation of the series, and covers the preceding rocks. The sandstone varies in colour, being sometimes grey, sometimes red. It contains marine shells; and these are sometimes different from those of the lower marine formation. It thus appears that there are in the vicinity of Paris three sorts of sandstone, sometimes very similar to each other in mineralogical characters, but differing in their geognostical position. The first, or lowest, makes part of the beds in the coarse or marine limestone, and contains marine shells: the second rests on the gypsum formation ; and even the marine marl that covers it is the most extensive, but contains no shells: and the third is only covered by what is termed the last fresh water formation, and immediately follows the second. It is the least frequent of the three, and like the first contains many marine shells.  9. Mill or buhrstone formation without shells.—This formation consists of feruginous argillaceous sand, clay marl, and millstone. Thus these substances do not appear to follow any determinate order in their superposition. The millstone is a quartz, containing, numerous irregular cavities that do not communicate with one another, and which are traversed by siliceous threads, disposed somewhat like the reticulated structure of a bone, and lined with a crust of red ochre. These cavities are sometimes filled with clay marl, or sand : they are never liced with siliceous incrustations, like calcedony, nor with crystals of quartz. These last characters, independently of its position, are sufficient to distinguish it from the millstone beds «f the siliceous limestone formation already mentioned. Another geognostic character of this rock is the want of petrifactions.  10. Second fresh water formation.—This formation rests on that last described, and is composed of two kinds of rock, the one siliceous, the other calcareous. The siliceous mineral is sometimes like flint, sometimes like jasper, and at times it is vesicular, like buhrstone. The limestone is sometimes compact, sometimes marly; often contains irregular cylindric cavities, nearly parallel, though crooked. They resemble exactly the cavities that would be formed in a bed of mud by bubbles of gas rising from the bottom to the surface. This limestone, when fresh gathered from the quarrv, has often the property of disintegrating by the influence of the air and water, "and hence h used as marl. But a principal character of this formation is the presence of fresh water shells: these are different species of helix, planorbro, limneus, potamides, cyclostoma, gyrogonites, and bulimus.  11. Alluvial.—The alluvial, or uppermost formation, is composed of variously coloured sand, marl, clay, or a mixture of these substances impregnated with carbon, which gives the mixture a brown or black colour. It contains rolled stones of different kinds, but is most particularly characterised by containing the remains of large organic bodies. It is in this formation that we find large trunks of trees, bones of elephants, also of oxen, rein-deer, and other large mammalia. This alluvial matter is deposited in hollows that have been scooped out of the solid rocks we have just enumerated. It is a very old deposite, as it appears to have been formed before the commencement of our history, because it contains remains of trees and animals different from any that exist at present in the neighbouring country, or in the globe.From the preceding account it would appear that the strata around Paris are of clay, gravel, sand, sandstone, millstone or buhrstone, marl, limestone, chalk, and gypsum ; and these are said to constitute 11 different formations. It would probably simplify our view of this tract of country, and be equally correct, if we diminished the number of formations in the following manner:—  1. Chalk formation. 2. Coarse marine limestone formation, under which we would include not only the coarse limestone, but also the siliceous limestone, plastic clay, and sand, because this latter is intermixed with the limestone, and there is an uninterrupted transition from the one into the other. 3. Gypsum formation, or first fresh water formation. 4. Sandstone formation, under which might be included the sand and sandstone without shells, the upper marine sandstone, and the buhrstone without shells. 5. Second fresh water formation, composed of limestone and flint. 6. Alluvial formation. From the intermixture of fresh and salt water, organic productions in these formations, we may suppose that both these fluids must have contributed each their part in their formation. Cuvier is of opinion that the first two formations, viz. the chalk and limestone, are of marine origin, because they contain principally sea shells; but the limestone contained also many fresh water shells. The third formation, the gypsum, from its containing remains of land quadrupeds, birds, and fresh water shells, is conjectured to have been deposited from fresh water; but it also contain- marine shells. The fourth, or sandstone formation, from its containing principally marine shells, is said to be of marine origin. The fifth formation, from its containing principally fresh water shells, is conjectured to have been deposited from the water of a lake. The sixth, the alluvial formation, has been formed in the same manner as other alluvial deposites. According to Cuvier and Brongniart there appears to have been an alternate appearance and disappearance of fresh and salt water, an opinion which is not borne out by the facts stated in, the essay. The opinions of Braard, La Metherie, and others, in regard to the kind of fluid from which these strata have been deposited, like the hypotheses of the authors of the essay, are sufficiently ingenious, but unsatisfactory.Having premised this short account of the formations around Paris, we shall next notice some objections that have been started against the Wernerian geognosy, from the appearances presented by these rocks. It has been said, "The authors of the description of the country around Paris have themselves remarked that the appearances exhibited in that country are not consistent with the doctrines of the Wernerian school. We must add, that to us they appear most adverse to the theory of universal formations, the favourite and distinguishing dogma of that school, eleven formations are here enumerated, and shown to succeed one another in one uniform order. They do so, however, only ever a certain tract; and have none of them the least pretensions to be reckoned universal." The authors of the essay have in no part of it said that the appearances they describe are inconsistent with the doctrines of the Wernerian school: on the contrary, it is evident that they consider their descriptions as adding a new set of rocks to that system, by means of which they have been able to render their investigations so interesting. It is true that a considerable series of formations succeed one another in one uniform order; but they are not confined to a small tract of country; part of the series has already been traced through trance to the confines of Switserland, and by one of the authors of the essay; and we are informed by Dr. Steffens, that the gypsum of Mont Martre occurs at Kiel in Holstein, on the shores of the Baltic : and now that the attention of mineralogists has been particularly directed to these rocks, we may expect to hear of their being found in other quarters of the globe. Even allowing, for the sake of argument, that this series of ro9ks had not been traced further than the gates of Versailles, I ask, should we be entitled from thence to conclude, from the mere extent of the mass, that it would not on examination prove to be an universal formation ? I apprehend we could not, for this reason, that many of the formations now acknowledged to be universal were at first observed extending over very inconsiderable tracts of country. But the formations might be local ones, and therefore would not extend far and yet such an appearance, instead of militating against this doctrine of the Wernerian school, would be an illustration of the truth of it.It has further been remarked “that this same survey of the country around Paris is equally adverse to another doctrine of the school of Freyberg, closely connected with the former. The mineralogists of that school, it is said, have boldly ventured to assign to every stratum its individual place; and to fix, with more than prophetic skill, the order in which the different formations of the mineral kingdom will be found to succeed one another over the globe. If these pretensions are well founded, nothing in the science of mineralogy can be so valuable as the knowledge they must confer : if they are ill founded, nothing can be more pernicious than the errors into which they will betray. Every thing, therefore, is of importance, that brings them to the test of experience. Now it is remarked by Brongniart, that the order laid down by Werner is inverted in the case of the chalk. That substance is made the fifth of the floetz formation, and is placed above the highest floetz gypsum. Here, however, it appears far below it, with several formations between. The rule of Werner, therefore, does not hold in this instance; and it has been proved, that though the gypsum of Mont Martre agrees pretty nearly in its mineral characters with the newest gypsum formation of Werner, it differs entirely in its geological position. Again: the chalk described in this essay is not only covered by gypsum, but by limestone and the gypsum by a second stratum of limestone and of sandstone, besides the siliceous millstone; all which is quite inconsistent with the Wernerian arrangement. All this shows how very imperfect that arrangement is, notwithstanding its pretended infallibility." If the limestone and gypsum of this series of rocks had been precisely the same with the second floetz limestone, and the second floetz gypsum, then there might have been a shadow of plausibility in the remarks just stated; but the preceding descriptions demonstrate that they differ most completely from these formations, not only in their eryctognostic, but also in their geognostic relations. Brongniart, indeed, was so convinced of the truth of this, that far from viewing them as proofs of the fallacy of the geognosy, he describes both the limestone and gypsum as new and distinct formations : the one he names coarse limestone, to distinguish it from the older floetz limestones: the other he names the third floetz gypsum, to show that he considers it as different from the fibrous, or second floetz gypsum; and he places both above chalk. (Vid. Brong. Mineralogie.) If Werner had had the folly and presumption to maintain that his system was complete, and that no other rock was to be discovered, that therefore he had fixed and ascertained the individual place of every stratum, around the whole globe, he would have justly merited the severe and bitter censure of the reviewer of the essay of Cuvier and Brongniart.But the author of the remarks is not satisfied with this commentary on the system itself; in his zeal he ventures still further, and maintains that the disciples of the Wernerian school so cloud their descriptions of the mineralogy of countries with a barbarous and uncouth nomenclature, that we must turn from them in disgust. He says, "The clearness with which this essay is written, and the absence of all technical language, except where it is absolutely necessary, we consider as great recommendations. The geologists of the Wernerian school follow a method directly opposite to this; they affect a phraseology peculiar to themselves, and employ a vocabulary, of which the harsh and uncouth terms, when closely examined, have not the precision to which every other consideration appears to be sacrificed. Descriptions drawn up in this way excite little interest, and render a branch of knowledge extremely inaccessible, which in its own nature is calculated to be very generally understood. The darkness which the language of Werner has thrown round all his doctrines seems as if intended to protect them from the eyes of the vulgar and uninitiated; and it may be doubted whether the Eleusinian rites threw a darker veil over the opinions of the Greek mystics, than the vocabulary of Freyberg does over the dogmas of the Saxon school. The consequence is, that of all the mineralogical descriptions which the Wernerian school has produced, we are persuaded none will be found so satisfactory as that which is now before us."  If this Wernerian nomenclature be so barbarous and unseemly, so totally unfit for the purposes of science, and so repulsive to good taste, how does it happen that Cuvier and Brongniart, so justly panegyrised by the reviewer, use it throughout their whole essay. The technical words that occur in it are but few in number, because the series of rocks consists of but few separate species, and they do not include many simple minerals. The following are the rocks and minerals mentioned in the treatise: chalk, limestone, marl, gypsum, clay, sand, sandstone, millstone, menelite, hornstone, flint, jasper, and silenite. Now this nomenclature is precisely the same as that used by the Wernerian school. Even the reviewer himself, in spite of his antipathy to every thing Wernerian, is forced to use the same nomenclature; for he speaks of transition rocks, greenstone, &c. &c.; terms which he formerly considered as barbarous in the extreme, and worthy the school where they originated. But not only is the nomenclature for rocks and simple minerals used in this essay the same as that employed by Werner, but the authors also invariably employ his geognosiic phraseology; thus the word formation is used throughout in the Wernerian signification, and the fundamental rock or bason of the district is described according to the method of the geognosy. Even the order followed in the description of the formations is that of the Wernerian school, beginning with the oldest, and finishing with the newest; and the difficulties that occur in the investigation are resolved by an appeal to the rules and method of the geognosy. The very map which is attached to the essay is executed according to the plan of Werner; and its title shows that Cuvier and Brongniart do not consider the nomenclature as barbarous, for it is entitled a geognostie, not a geological map.  If then this essay be so pure in its nomenclature, and perfect in its descriptions; and if it owes this to the language used, and the method of investigation pursued; it follows that the Wernerian nomenclature, and mode of investigation, although contrary to the intention of the author of the remarks, is proved to be the best, and that which must be employed if our mineralogical investigations shall attract any notice from philosophers, or regard from those interested in the mineralogical surveys of countries.Lastly, the author of these remarks touches on a subject of high importance in geognostical inquiries; it is the study of the natural history of shells, as an accessory branch of geognosy. I cordially agree with him in opinion that conchology is a branch of natural history which cannot be sufficiently recommended to the attention of all geognosts, as furnishing important means of ascertaining with accuracy many of the leading facts in the history of the globe. It is a branch of natural history which has been long studied in Germany and France, and has of late years, particularly since its importance in geognosy has been ascertained and pointed out, made great advances. But we naturally inquire to whom arc we indebted for our present highly interesting views of the natural history of fossil organic remains in general? It is to Werner. More than 30 years ago he first embodied all that was known of petrifactions into a regular system. He insisted on t-ie necessity of every geognostical cabinet containing also an extensive collection not only of shells, but also of the various productions of the class zoophyta, of plants, particularly of sea and marsh plants, and ferns; and an examination of the remains of quadrupeds in the great limestone caves in Germany, soon pointed out to him the necessity of attaching to the geognostical cabinet also one of comparative osteology. As his views in geognosy enlarged, he saw more and more the value of a close and deep study of petrifactions. He first made the highly important observation, that different formations can be discriminated by the petrifactions they contain. It was during the course of his geognostical investigations that lie ascertained the general distribution of organic remains in the crust of the earth. He found that petrifactions appear first in transition rocks. These are but few in number, and of animals of the zoophytic of testaceous kinds. In the older floetz rocks they are of more perfect animals; and in the newest fioetz and alluvialrocks, of birds and quadrupeds, or animals of the most perfect kinds. He also found that the oldest vegetable petrifactions were of marine plants, the newer of large trees. A careful study of the genera. and species of petrifactions disclosed to him another important fact, viz. that the petrifactions contained in the oldest rocks are very different from any of the genera or species of the present time: that the newer the formation the more do the remains approach in form to the organic beings of the present creation, and that in the very newest formations fossil remains of the present existing species occur. He also ascertained that the petrifactions in the oldest rocks were much more mineralised than the petrifactions in the newer rocks, and that in the newest rocks they were merely bleached or calcined. He found that some species of petrifactions were confined to particular beds, others were distributed throughout whole formations, and others seemed to occur in several different formations ; the original species found in these formations appearing to have been so constituted as to live through a variety of changes which had destroyed thousands of other species, which we find confined to particular beds. He ascertained the existence of fresh water shells in solid strata, sometimes alone, sometimes intermixed with marine productions. These highly interesting observations having become generally known by means of his pupils, gave a stimulus to the study of petrifactions, which in a few years produced important results. They attracted the particular attention of the mineralogist, and roused the curiosity of the zoologist and botanist. They saw before them a wide field of the most interesting nature. The mineralogist confidently anticipated from this study important elucidations in regard to the various changes the earth has undergone, during the progress of its formation, from the earliest periods to the present time. The zoologist and botanist, by the discovery of new genera and species, hoped to increase the number of natural families, to fill up gaps in the present systems, and thus to perfect more and more the natural system of animals and plants. But this was not all. The philosophic naturalist soon saw that these investigations would also lead to much curious information in regard to the former physical and geographical distribution of plants and animals, to the changes which the animated world in general, and particular genera and species, have undergone, and probably are still undergoing ; and he would naturally be led to speculate on the changes that must have taken place in the climate of the globe during the various changes and revolutions. The writings of Blumenbach, Von Hoff, Cuvier, Brongniart, Steftens, and other naturalists, are proofs of what has been done by following up the views of Werner. 