Robert JamesonIS THE HUTTONIAN THEORY OF THE EARTH CONSISTENT WITH FACT? Mr. President, The celebrated theory of Doctor Hutton has, for several years, attracted the attention of geologists, not more from the ingenuity with which it is supported, than the vast collection of facts which it contains, rising in this respect far superior to all former conjectures. His arrangement is extensive, and would require more time than the Society could spare, for a complete examination would include a thorough review of the most interesting mineral phenomena. It would be preposterous then to investigate all the general principles he has laid down ; I shall therefore only examine that position which appears to me to be the basis of the theory ; that is, that all the strata of the globe have been consolidated by means of heat, and hardened from a state of fusion. To explain this position two principles have been assumed, viz. Insuperable Compression and Slow Cooling. The consideration of these will consequently contain what I have to say in these few notes with regard to this theory. INSUPERABLE COMPRESSION. This wonderful principle of compression, we are told, prevents the escape of elastic vapours, fuses silex, etc. And, in proof of this, various mineral phenomena are produced, which are said to be inexplicable upon any other principle. Thus, silex is said to be insoluble in water, consequently, must have been crystallised, etc., from fusion. All this, however, must be rejected, when we find that silex is soluble in water, and that it is probable it can form crystals, by extremely minute division, as is the opinion of Kirwan, Macie, and Chaptal. We are next told that the flinty nodules, found in chalkbeds, have been in a state of fusion, and ejected from some other place to their present situation, then the strata have been raised from the bottom of the sea. Unluckily, in this instance, he allows, notwithstanding immense compression, that these flinty nodules can be tossed from one place to another. The only other fact I shall consider is the petrifaction of wood. This, we are informed, is produced by the liquid flint being injected into the body of the wood under immense compression. To this curious piece of hypothesis I may answer by referring to the consideration of specimens of petrified wood, where one half is silicified, the other in its natural state. What becomes of the vegetable matter that disappears ? It must be converted into carbonic acid ; and this, we are told, cannot take place under insuperable compression. These facts militate against this opinion more than the Doctor appears to have been aware of, and are more supported from the consideration of the phenomena that must have occurred in the consolidation of the globe. Thus, he tells us that this world is the ruins of a former, which had gradually been deposited at the bottom of the sea in a loose form, but, by the application of heat; under immense compression, was hardened. Here then the particles are much approached to each other, and the solid materials are formed, consequently air and water must be separated. This being allowed (which, I think, cannot be denied) it follows that all crystallised bodies should be destitute of water of crystallisation ; in short, that all the materials of the globe should be in a glassy form. From what has been now said, it appears that notwithstanding insuperable compression, carbonic acid can be formed, flints tossed from one part to another, and immense quantities of air and water separated. All these, according to the Doctors own statement, must have occurred ; therefore, it will not be thought presumptuous if the idea of insuperable compression be rejected till further proof be brought of its existence. This being set aside, the whole theory appears to fall to the ground. I am, however, aware of the possibility of considerable controversy about this ; I shall therefore examine the theory a little further, to endeavour to discover something satisfactory. In doing this, I am naturally led to the consideration of the second principle, that is, SLOW COOLING. This idea was first started by the ingenious Sir James Hall, one of the most able advocates for this theory. In reflecting upon the formation of granite by fire, it immediately occurred to him that although insuperable compression was present, yet still it followed that the quartz and felspar would form a homogeneous mass. Much about this time a curious appearance was observed in the cooling of glass, which he mentions in the following terms : — Even reasoning a priori from such a phenomenon, I should never have adduced it as an irrefragable proof of the Huttonian theory ; for the term slow cooling is here evidently another way of expressing a chemical change ; if so, it cannot be applied to explain the formation of granite. That this is the true explanation we find from his own words, when he tells us that the glass had lost all its properties, was opaque, white, very hard and refractory. Will any peculiar arrangement of particles cause a substance to lose all its properties, and assume new ones ? If not, it follows that this change must depend upon the abstraction, or addition, of some matter ; consequently this explanation must be rejected. To be convinced more certainly of the truth of what I have now said, I made the following experiments : — Experiment 1st. Exposed a quantity of green glass to a strong heat, in a wind-furnace, for some hours ; suddenly exposed it to the cold air, and found that it was completely converted into a whitish mass. Experiment 2nd. Exposed equal quantities of green glass, and what Sir James Hall calls slowly cooled glass, to heat in a smith's forge; when I observed that the slowly cooled glass (as it is called) required greater heat to fuse it. Experiment 3rd. Exposed a quantity of green glass to a strong heat, fused it, then cooled it suddenly ; and observed the surface to have somewhat of a zeolitiform appearance. Experiment 4th. Melted a considerable quantity of green glass in a large crucible, and allowed it to cool slowly (that is, by allowing the fire to be gradually extinguished) ; when I observed several zeolitiform masses, which were slightly opaque, had the usual hardness and fragility of glass, with the same glassy fracture. Experiment 5th. Filled several crucibles with green glass, then put them into a wind-furnace, continued the application of heat for several hours, taking out the crucibles at different periods to observe the successive changes of the glass at different temperatures ; when I found that as the heat was continued the glass grew opaque, hard, and at last was reduced to a substance much resembling frit, being the siliceous matter combined with a very small proportion of alkali. After having made these experiments, I was told by a gentleman that glass made from metallic oxides, would, by slow cooling, become opaque, etc. To ascertain the truth of this, I made the following experiment : Experiment 6th. Took certain proportions of pure silex and red oxide of lead, and melted them together ; allowed the materials in one crucible to cool slowly ; but the other was instantly immersed in cold water : both presented the same transparent orange-coloured glass. These experiments show us that the change of the properties of glass does not depend on slow cooling, but upon the application of certain degrees of heat, which extricates from it some substance, in greater or less quantity, according to the continuance of this heat. The nature of this substance, I apprehend, is at once evident : it is plainly the alkali of the glass, which is demonstrated from its opacity and infusibility. This is also further proved from the experiment with the glass made of lead, where no such change could be produced. To all this it may be objected, as is done by several eminent chemists, that opaque masses are found in the centre of masses of glass, where the alkali possibly could not be separated. In answer to this it must be inquired : Are these masses always of the same nature ? If they are not (which is the case), it follows that the explanation of their formation must be different. That these masses are sometimes crystallised cannot be disputed ; but have they lost any of their properties ? Have they not the same fragility as glass? The same fracture and degree of fusibility ? They have, however, very different appearances ; sometimes they are the neutral salts used in the formation of glass, which have been prevented from rising to the surface ; they may be what the workmen call tears, which are part of the pots vitrified ; or particles of sand, which, in the operation of fritting, have been precipitated by the too sudden application of heat, and consequent separation of alkali. What conclusion, then, are we to draw with regard to this slow-cooling? I apprehend it is this : — That the opacity, infusibility, etc., of the glass does not depend at all upon slow cooling ; but, on the contrary, it depends on the continued application of a certain degree of heat, which favours the escape of the alkali, thus changing the chemical nature of the glass. It appears, then, that immense compression and slow cooling are, as yet, wanting of proof; consequently the pillars of the Huttonian conjecture are not well founded. P.S. — I omitted to mention the account which Dr. Hutton has given of Natron. He tells us that it is ‘a solid crystalline salt, with a structure which, upon fracture, appears to be sparry and radiated, something resembling zeolite. It contains no water of crystallisation, but melts in a sufficient heat without any aqueous fusion.' To this account the celebrated Kirwan answers by producing specimens which contain water of crystallisation. The Doctor, however, is so little satisfied with this sort of explanation, that he questions whether or not he is to consider that the author is, on this occasion, consistent with himself? I can only say that from the opportunities I have had in examining this substance, which have been very considerable, I have often observed saline efflorescence, demonstrating to a certainty the presence of water. 