I.—On the Geology of Southern Pembrokeshire. 
BY H. T. DE LA BECHE, ESQ. F.R., L. and G. S.S. ETC. 
THE district which forms the subject of the present memoir, comprehends the whole of Southern Pembrokeshire. It deserves the attention of the geologist, not only from its including the western extremity of the great coalbasin of South Wales, and exhibiting along the boundaries of that basin, within a narrow compass, the mutual and diversified relations of the carboniferous and transition systems of rocks; but also from its presenting in both those systems striking instances of disturbance and contortion, and displaying perhaps in a more remarkable manner than any other district in England the real character of those varieties of trap which so commonly occur associated with transition formations f. The long series of natural sections presented by the tortuous coast which extends from St. Bride's Bay on the west to Caermarthen Bay on the east, and by the shores of Milford Haven which traverses the centre of the district, afford remarkable facilities for investigating the structure of the country.
The surface of the district, in general, is exceedingly undulated: few of the ranges, however, are striking, nor are there any of very considerable height. The country near the shores of Milford Haven is often well wooded; but in other parts it is almost bare of timber, and particularly to the north-west of Haverfordwest.
Of the formations occurring within the district I shall treat in the following order:
The rocks which I mean to comprehend under this name, are very abundant in the district. They form in several cases insulated hills, and occasionally continuous ridges of some extent. Their appearance on the surface is usually distinguished by craggy piles of rock, such as in Devonshire are called Tors, but in Pembrokeshire and other parts of Wales are termed Cams. The best characterized varieties of trap consist of distinctly crystallized aggregates of felspar, quartz, and hornblende, forming syenite or greenstone, according as the first or last of these ingredients predominates. The former rock is of much rarer occurrence than the latter. Augite has not hitherto been discovered in these coarsely crystallized aggregates.
Associated with these aggregates are other rocks of a more obscure character, yet so connected with the former, as clearly to be referrible to the same formation. Of their real constitution, unfortunately, neither mineralogical character nor chemical analysis affords any decisive evidence. They present a fine-grained homogeneous paste, which often becomes porphyritic from crystals of felspar, and more rarely of hornblende, imbedded in it: they occasionally contain epidote, and perhaps also chlorite. I am inclined to consider them as fine-grained aggregates of the three minerals so evidently displayed in the above-mentioned crystalline varieties of trap, and to attribute to the different proportions of these ingredients the subordinate shades of character by which these rocks are diversified. Where the felspar may be supposed to prevail, the result approaches to compact felspar; where the quartz, we have a regular hornstone, generally coloured, however, by minute green particles disseminated through it, which probably consist of hornblende. The finegrained variety with an excess of hornblende has not hitherto been discovered in the district. To certain of this family, in which hornblende predominates, the French have given the name of Aphanite; but they would denote these fine-grained rocks, generically, by the term pierre corneenne, which so well expresses their usual aspect. I shall naturalize, on this occasion, the term Cornean, and shall apply to it the epithet Felspathic, or Quartzose, according to the ingredient supposed to prevail in the rock.
Besides the above-mentioned varieties of trap, there occurs one which has the appearance of a conglomerate. The base is a black and very compact trap, which contains grains of quartz, and seeming fragments of crystallized felspar and of compact felspathic cornean. It is probably, however, a pseudoconglomerate, or concretional rock, originating in a peculiar and cotemporaneous aggregation of its constituent parts.
I shall now proceed to describe the various insulated masses, belonging to varieties of trap, that occur within the district.
Vicinity of St. David's. 
Penberry Rock, to the north of St. David's, is of an irregular conical shape. Its summit is a greenstone, composed of well-defined grains of hornblende and felspar, of middling size. Felspathic cornean is in some parts associated with the greenstone. Greywacke forms the base of the hill, and appears to rest upon the trap. On the northern side however, in several places, trap is intermixed with greywacke, and in some is interstratified with it. In one instance a continuous mass of trap descends from the top of the hill to the sea. It seems rather to be interposed between the strata of greywacke, than to cut through them.
At a little distance to the south-west of Penberry a ridge of trap emerges, which forms a remarkable feature in the country; and after reaching its highest point at a rock called Llacithty, extends to the sea in Whitesand Bay. It is composed of the same kind of massive unstratified greenstone as Penberry Rock, of which it may be deemed the continuation.
Greywacke is observable in small quantity to the north of the ridge of Llacithty, between Porthyrow and a bay near Cesselvawr Head. It is much intermixed with trap; so that it is difficult to determine whether the latter be transverse or conformable to the strata of greywacke. Greywacke forms the north-western base of the ridge of Llacithty; but further to the north-west another ridge of greenstone appears, extending from Cesselvawr Head to St. David's Head. In substance it resembles the rock of Llacithty, excepting that it is stratified, with a dip to the north-west of about 45°.
A series of rocky tors, to the west and south-west of St. David's, marks the course of a large body of trap, extending from Crosswoodig on the north, to Pen-y-Main-Melin Point on the south. This mass has not the slightest appearance of being stratified. It is very variable in its composition. Near St. David's felspathic cornean forms its base, in which are disseminated numerous crystals of quartz and felspar. At Trevaythan the base is more earthy, and contains crystals of a green colour, crystallized felspar, and very little quartz. At the tor of Clegurfwya, and at other points to the west of St. David's, the rock resembles that of Treginnis, described by Dr. Kidd (see Geological Transactions, first series, vol. ii. p. 89.) as "assuming the appearance of compact earthy felspar, being of an olive-green colour, and probably containing epidote." A section of this body of trap extends along the coast from the point opposite the Horse Rock in Ramsey Sound, to Pen-y-Main-Melin Point, and thence to the point opposite the rocks called the Bishops and the Crow.
The two irregularly conical hills called the Beacons of Ramsey, the one on the northern, the other on the southern side of the island, are composed of trap. The northern beacon consists principally of greenstone, resembling that of the ridge of Llacithty. On the west it is bounded by the sea, but on every other side by strata of greywacke. A bed or dyke of cornean occurs between the vertical beds of greywacke that separate the two beacons, having, like those beds, a direction from east to west. The southern beacon, together with Margery Isle, and so much of Ramsey Island as lies to the south of a line drawn from near the House to the southern end of Abermawr Sand, conr sists chiefly of porphyry. Felspathic and quartzose cornean are associated with the trap on this side of the island. A substance resembling anthracite is found in vertical veins traversing the trap of the southern part of the island. Wherever it is exposed to the sea, it is washed out, and the walls of trap are left standing, forming picturesque coves.
It would be difficult to determine accurately, owing to the want of natural sections, how much of the surface immediately around St. David's consists of trap. Blocks of it, belonging principally to the greenstone variety, lie scattered over the soil in every direction, and are often seen resting upon greywacke. At Clegir Bridge, near St. David's, quartzose cornean, occasionally striped, is found associated with greenstone. Following the high-road from thence to Solfach, almost all the field-divisions are found to consist of blocks of trap. Some few, of large dimensions, which have not been thus appropriated, are observed resting on greywacke, which is here the prevailing rock. Trap occurs intermixed with greywacke in the neighbourhood of Solfach. It is found in ascending the hill on the road to Haverfordwest. Porphyritic greenstone is met with under Upper Solfach. Both the points of Solfach Harbour are composed of greenstone, which may be traced across two or three small headlands to the eastward, there forming a vertical bed or dyke not more than a few yards in thickness, having the same direction as the vertical beds of greywacke, and probably interposed between them. Pursuing the high-road from Solfach to Newgate Bridge, the blocks in the field-divisions are found to consist of trap, and principally of greenstone. These blocks become less abundant as you approach the cliff.
Range from Roche to Trafgam. 
A chain of hills, considerably elevated above the surrounding country, extends from Cuffern Mountain to Trafgam Rocks, most of the highest points in the chain being crowned with rocky tors. The most conspicuous of these tors are those of Trafgam. The less elevated and apparently insulated tor, upon which Roche Castle stands, is connected towards the east with Cuffern Mountain: towards the west, the same mass of rock extends to the distance of about half a mile on the road to Bathesland. Nearly all these tors are of the same kind of quartzose cornean; in which, however, the proportion of quartz varies, the rock of Roche containing the most. This cornean has no appearance of stratification. Other varieties of trap, however, are associated with the cornean in this range. Blocks of porphyritic greenstone occur at Trafgam; and blocks of greenstone and of black porphyritic cornean are found between Roche and Cuffern Mountain.
This chain is bounded to the north and south by greywacke, through which it appears to be protruded. At its western extremity, near Bathesland, it is covered by coal-measures, over which, at many places in that neighbourhood, are strown blocks of quartzose comean and greenstone.
Trap between Druson Haven and Broad Haven. 
A tract between these two havens, consisting of coal-measures and greywacke, and extending about two miles from north to south and about half a mile from east to west, is bestrown with blocks of trap, of which many must weigh from five to six tons. They consist principally of greenstone and greenstone-porphyry. The only spot in the neighbourhood where trap appears in situ, is at the hill behind Druson Haven, where the two branches of a rivulet (the one descending from Nolton, the other from Druson) unite. The prevailing rock at this hill is greenstone, and it seems to project through the other rocks. Near the trap the greywacke is contorted. (See PI. II. fig. 1.)
Trap of Gouldtrop Road in St. Bride's Bay. 
From Gouldtrop Road to Millhaven there is a fine and interesting section of the trap and of the other rocks here connected with it. (See PL II. fig. 2.) The rock at Gouldtrop Road is either a syenite or a large-grained greenstone, according as quartz is present or wanting in the mass. Gouldtrop Head is formed of a smaller-grained greenstone. The same rock appears also well characterized near Millhaven; and it is indeed the prevailing variety of trap in the tract under consideration.
By reference to the plate it will be seen that the body of trap rises at Millhaven from beneath old red sandstone, which is disturbed and bent near the place of contact; that at the base of the cliff near Gouldtrop Head it rests on a curved mass of carboniferous limestone; and that at Gouldtrop Road it abuts against, and rests upon, not only the limestone, but also coal-measures, of which the strata are bent back. Here then is a mass of trap, not differing in mineralogical character from those masses of the same rock which have previously been described as associated with and subjacent to greywacke, and which by many would be termed, from those circumstances of position, transition trap. Yet here we find it, at the same time supporting old red sandstone, and incumbent on carboniferous limestone and on coal-measures. It would be difficult to explain these phaenomena by any other hypothesis than that of the forcible intrusion of trap among the other rocks, at a period subsequent to that of their being formed and consolidated.
Range of Trap from Bolton Beacon to Benton Castle. 
This mass appears to be connected with the former by a dyke which passes through Rosepool and Walwin's Castle to Tiers Cross; since blocks of trap can be traced along this line, and since a perpendicular dyke of felspathic cornean, a few feet thick, occurs in the face of the cliff at Walwin's Castle. The blocks are far from numerous, and are rather difficult to trace. They mostly consist of greenstone, like that near the parsonage at Walwin's Castle: some however approach in character to cornean.
From Bolton Beacon eastward, this range is considerably elevated above the neighbouring country, but mostly so towards its two extremities. It varies in substance in different parts of its course. At Bolton Beacon it is a greenstone, approaching in some places to greenstone-porphyry: from Johnston to Trooper's End syenite predominates; which sometimes, owing to the absence of quartz, becomes a large-grained greenstone. Felspathic cornean occurs near Thurston; and the same rock prevails at the eastern extremity near Benton Castle, where it forms several small tors on the surface.
This range is bounded on the north, from Tiers Cross to Nash, by coalmeasures, except near Johnston, where a small band of mountain limestone intervenes. Both the coal-measures and the limestone between Tiers Cross and Nash, are highly contorted. From Nash to Milford Haven the range is flanked on the north by a rock resembling greywacke (to be described in the sequel), which towards Guilford has its strata nearly vertical. The same rock forms the entire southern boundary of the trap, and is every where found to dip from it.
Trap ofMarloes and Skomer Island. 
This mass of trap, which forms the southern point of St. Bride's Bay, is separated from that of Millhaven by well characterized old red sandstone, and is bounded on the south by the rock resembling greywacke. It forms a wedge-shaped mass, which gradually becomes narrower towards the east, and does not extend inland above half a mile eastward of Marloes. It appears to rest upon the sandstone, and to rise from beneath the rock resembling greywacke. Both these rocks dip at a considerable angle to the south; and as the breadth of the trap diminishes, they gradually approach one another, until they unite to the east of Marloes.
This mass consists principally of greenstone, containing rocks, however, intermediate between cornean and greenstone. Between St. Martin's Haven and Marloes there is a small tor of trap. At a small cove near Mosely Wick Farm, where the trap comes in contact with the old red sandstone, a coarsegrained siliceous rock appears to proceed from the trap in veins, which diminish as they recede from it, and penetrate to a short distance between the strata of sandstone.
All the north of Skomer Island consists of massive trap, having the character principally of fine-grained compact greenstone, and sometimes approaching to cornean. The small peninsula, however, to the east of the landing-place, must be excepted, where some stratified rocks of ambiguous appearance occur. The southern part of the island consists of stratified greenstone, dipping at about 48° to the south-east. Between this and the greenstone belonging to the north of the island a quartzose cornean, mostly striped, occurs. In some parts of the island hornblende is the prevailing ingredient of the rock.
From the information of intelligent seamen it should appear that Grasholm Island, and the rock on which the Smalls Lighthouse stands, consist of a rock similar to that of the northern side of Skomer Island. If this account be correct, a great dyke of trap must extend westward from Marloes to the Smalls Lighthouse, parts of which only appear above the water. The bottom of the sea along that line is known to be very rocky.
§ 2.—GREYWACKE. 
(A) Great GreywackS District, North of the Coal-basin. 
The great tract of greywacke, which extends through North Pembrokeshire, has its southern boundary-line within the limits of our district. This line passes from west to east, beginning in the cliffs of St. Bride's Bay, a little to the north of Broad Haven, and leaving our district at Lethergloyn, near Narberth. So much of this greywacke-tract as falls within our present scope, may be divided into two portions, that of St. David's, and that of Haverfordwest; the former lying to the north and west, the latter to the south and east of the Cuffern range of trap.
St. David's Greywacke District. 
Greywacke, mixed with trap, occurs abundantly from Aberciddy Bay to Penberry Rock, which it nearly surrounds. It is worked for roofing-slate at some rocks which project into the sea near Penberry Crags. From the cliffs under Penberry Rock to Cesselvawr Head it is much intermingled with trap. Perpendicular beds of slaty greywacke, bearing from north-east to south-west, occupy the space between the two trap-ridges of Llacithty and Cesselvawr. To the south of Llacithty Rock, greywacke extends from the Slate-quarry on the northern side of Whitesand Bay to the re-commencement of the trap opposite the Horse Rock, forming in its way the cliffs in the neighbourhood of Pencarnon. At the Slate-quarry the strata are perpendicular, bearing east and west, conformably to the range of Llacithty; from Pencarnon southwards they dip to the west, ranging north and south, conformably to the trap-range which stretches from Crosswoodig. In the immediate neighbourhood of St. David's, from the quantity of trap-blocks on the surface, and the want of natural sections, the greywacke can hardly be traced as distinct from the trap. From St. David's to Newgate Bridge the two rocks are much intermixed; but excepting near Solfach, the cliffs on the northern side of St. Bride's Bay, from about a mile to the west of Porthclaise as far as Newgate Bridge, consist entirely of greywacke, disposed for the most part in thick beds, interstratified with a rock resembling old red sandstone. It is from the latter that the stone for the new work at St. David's cathedral has been quarried. The small bays between Porthclaise and Carbudie Mill, and thence to Trellerwer, afford good sections of this rock; which is also found between Roche Bridge and New Mill. A quartzose conglomerate, resembling one of old red sandstone, occurs between Clegir Bridge and the sea. The general bearing of the greywacke, between St. David's and the Cuffern range of trap, is from east to west, the dip being to the south.
Haverfordwest GreywackS District. This is bounded on the north by the Cuffern range of trap; on the northwest, from Roche to Druson Haven, by coal-measures: on the south-west, from Druson Haven to Broad Haven, a section of the greywacke is presented by the coast. On both sides of Druson Haven the strata are much contorted. (See PI. II. fig. 1.) From thence to Broad Haven there are both thick and slaty beds, though usually in the Haverfordwest district the greywacke is slaty. The southern limits of this district will best be traced on the map. (See PI. I.) Near the eastern extremity of the southern boundary-line, between Lethergloyn and the river near Canaston, the junction of the greywacke with the superincumbent old red sandstone is tolerably well defined.
(B) Greyvcackk South of the Coal-basin. 
On the southern side, and also round the eastern extremity, of the trapridge extending from Bolton Beacon to Benton Castle, a peculiar rock occurs, which may be considered as a neutral one, between greywacke and old red sandstone, having more the character of the former than of the latter, though seldom acquiring the slaty appearance of the greywacke occurring to the north of the Coal-basin.
This rock commences in a point near Tiers Cross, and gradually widens towards the west. Prom Tiers Cross it is bounded on the south by genuine old red sandstone, into which it passes so gradually that no line of separation can be drawn between them. The boundary, however, may be considered as passing through Redstock, and thence southwards of Rosemarket to Llanstadwell. Leaving Johnston for Milford, yellowish-brown beds of sandstone, which may be termed friable greywacke, are met with, dipping from the trap. Loose sandy beds occur not far from Johnston on the road to Rosemarket, and at a little distance from the trap on the road between Rosemarket and Waterless. At a point where a small rivulet crosses the last-mentioned road, beds of greywacke appear dipping to the west. At Milton, between Rosemarket and Pembroke Ferry, a few thin beds are seen dipping to the southeast, at an angle of 45°, which have more the character of old red sandstone than of greywacke. At Burton the rock is principally of a brownish-gray colour; but two or three red strata traverse the garden of the parsonage. The same rock, with a few red strata occurring here and there, continues nearly to Benton Farm. The beds are sometimes of tolerable thickness, sometimes coarsely slaty, and frequently micaceous. The small peninsula between West Lenion and Pembroke Ferry consists of the same rock, as does the entire peninsula of Cosheston. Very few red strata are observable between Cosheston and Lawrenny Ferry. The dip at Cosheston is to the south-east: that on the south side of Lawrenny Ferry is to the east, at an angle of from 20° to 30°. The western part of the Lawrenny peninsula is also of this rock, mixed with some red-coloured beds: at the village on the eastern side it has much the appearance of slaty old red sandstone. Between Guilford and the trap are brownishgray beds, having the aspect of greywacke, mixed with others that resemble old red sandstone. At the bottom of Benton Wood these beds are nearly vertical.
Similar rocks to the preceding occur to the south of the trap near Marloes. They consist either of coarse slate, or of beds very variable in thickness. Thick beds of very compact quartzose sandstone are found resting on the trap to the south of St. Martin's Haven, and dipping to the south at from 45° to 50°.
A section drawn southwards, from the trap of Gouldtrop Road at Talbanny to St. Ann's Head, shows that these beds, which so much resemble greywacke, are intimately connected with old red sandstone. The dip of all the beds in this section is to the south, generally at a high angle. Prom Talbanny to Mallock Mill we have genuine old red sandstone. At the latter place appear 6ome beds resembling greywacke. To these succeed others of old red sandstone. Near Marloes the pseudo-greywacke recurs, and continues to the coast opposite Gateholm Island. The coast and the island are of old red sandstone. Similar alternations are seen in the cliffs between Little Marloes and St. Ann's Head.
§ 3.—OLD RJED SANDSTONE. The old red sandstone of Pembrokeshire, like the greywacke, may be considered as forming two principal districts; the first lying to the north, the second to the south, of the Coal-basin.
(A) Old Bed Sandstone to the North of the Coal-basin. 
This district, forming the western extremity of that connected tract of old red sandstone which traverses the counties of Hereford, Brecknock, and Glamorgan, lies eastward of that branch of Milford Haven which reaches up to Canaston Bridge, and receives the Cledden or East Cledder river. From Mynwer its southern boundary passes nearly due east, by Templeton and Pendine, to Caermarthen Bay. Its junction on the north with greywacke, between Canaston and Lethergloyn, has been already noticed.
This sandstone along its southern boundary dips to the south, at an angle of from 20° to 25°; but to the north of this boundary the angle increases considerably.
(B) Old Red Sandstone to the South of the Coal-basin. 
This southern district is subdivided into three minor ones; that of Milford, that of Pembroke, and that of Orielton: the first lying to the north of Milford Haven, the two latter commencing on the opposite shore, and being separated from one another by a trough of carboniferous limestone.
Milford Subdivision. 
The coast of St. Bride's Bay, from the trap of Millhaven to that of Marloes, affords a section of the western part of this subdivision. This sandstone is bounded on the north, from Millhaven to Tiers Cross, by a mass or dyke of trap; and on the north-east, from Tiers Cross to Llanstadwell, by the rock resembling greywacke. On the south, from St. Ann's Head to Llanstadwell, it is terminated by Milford Haven. Skokham Island is a continuation westward of the sandstone which extends from Dale to St. Ann's Head.
The principal dip of the sandstone-beds in this subdivision is to the south. At their junction with the trap, near Millhaven, they are contorted. (See PI.II. fig. 2.) From thence to St. Bride's they gradually acquire a gentle dip to the south, of from 15° to 20°. At their junction with the trap, near Moselywick, they are highly inclined; which is mostly the case, indeed, with the beds in this subdivision.
In different places the strata vary very much as to hardness. They are sometimes marly, and in other cases they consist of a very compact siliceous grit.
To this subdivision it will be most convenient to refer the beds upon which the coal-measures rest near Langum, at the north-east corner of the range of trap extending from Bolton Beacon to Benton Castle. They have the character rather of old red sandstone than of greywacke, though a few strata resembling the latter are mixed with them. The same beds cross the point near Langum Ferry, and reappear in the eastern part of Lawrenny.
Pembroke Subdivision. 
The principal part of this subdivision is contained in a narrow band of sandstone running nearly due east from Milford Haven to Caermarthen Bay, and dipping on either side beneath carboniferous limestone. The Ridgeway, on the road from Pembroke to Penally, commanding fine views of the surrounding country, is the highest hill in this subdivision. The sandstone of this band appears again to the west in two small peninsulas on the southern side of Milford Haven.
The sandstone here treated of closely resembles that of the Milford subdivision; but some near Patterchurch approaches in character to the rock resembling greywacke. A small-grained compact quartzose conglomerate appears in the neighbourhood of Penally. There occurs in several places on the top of the Ridgeway a loose conglomerate, consisting of rounded pieces of sandstone cemented together by soft red marl. This is particularly observable on the road near the top of the hill above Holloways, between Penally and Tenby.
The dip of the sandstone, in the westernmost of the two above-mentioned peninsulas, at the cliffs north of the Angle Valley, is to the south, at an angle of from 70° to 80°: at the Cliffs near Patterchurch, in the same direction, at about 40°; and at East Pennar, near Pembroke, it is also to the south, at an angle of about 80°. Owing to the want of natural sections, it is difficult to determine the dip in the Ridgeway. To judge from the edges of a few beds by the road-side between the Ridgeway and Carew, the strata are nearly vertical. On the top of the hill above Penally, a few beds project above the soil, dipping at about 40° to the northward; but the eastern extremity of the Ridgeway is almost wholly concealed by the sands of Penally Burrows.
Orielton Subdivision. 
This subdivision, like that of Pembroke, consists of a band of old red sandstone running from west to east, and dipping on either side beneath carboniferous limestone. For its precise limits I must beg to refer to the map. Quartzo.se conglomerates are observed about Dry Burrows, near Orielton, and between Lambeth and Lambeth Mill.
At the westernmost point of this band of sandstone, in the cliff to the south of West Angle, the strata dip to the north at from 70° to 80°: at QuaitsMill, near Pembroke, they dip to the north-by-east at nearly the same angle. At the easternmost point of the sandstone, in a small cove between ShrinkleFarm and Old Castle Head, the sandstone is perpendicular, and continues so round that head, and round Manorbeer and Swanslake Bays. The edges of the vertical beds are beautifully displayed at low water in Manorbeer Bay. The southern half of Caldy Island is the continuation of the sandstone of Old Castle Head, and, like that head, has its beds vertical, and some of them of a light greenish-blue colour mixed with those which are red. The direction of all these vertical beds is from west-by-north to east-by-south. To the north of Stackpoole Quay the beds are nearly vertical.
§ 4.—CARBONIFEROUS LIMESTONE. 
Like the greywacke and the old red sandstone, the limestone may be referred to two principal districts, the one lying to the north, the other to the south of the Coal-basin.
(A) Northern District of Limestone. 
The first appearance of this limestone on the west is in a quarry near Haverfordwest, at a short distance to the west of Maudlin Bridge; whence a band of it, of inconsiderable breadth, extends to Milling near Picton Castle. From thence to the south of Newton the coal-measures lap over and conceal the limestone. In the quarries near the latter place the limestone reappears, and is thence continued by Templeton to Pendine Cliffs in Caermarthen Bay, forming a range about a quarter of a mile in breadth; except near Pendine, where it is somewhat broader.
From the point where it first appears, as far as Milling, the limestone rests upon greywacke; and from Newton Quarries to Pendine Cliffs upon old red sandstone: in either part it sinks beneath the coal-measures. The limestone in this northern district is not very highly inclined, nor is it disturbed like that to the south of the coal-district. At Templeton the dip is about 25° to the south. At the old quarries, at Eglywslwyd, east of Templeton, the strata are horizontal, but incline towards the south as they approach the coal-measures. On the northern side of Marcroes Mountain, near Pendine, the beds dip at about 30° to the south-south-west, and in Pendine Cliff at the same angle to the south-west.
Pendine is situated half on the limestone, and half on old red sandstone; the lower limestone-shale being observable at the junction of the two rocks opposite Pendine Great House. The limestone beds in Pendine Cliffs vary from a few inches to ten feet in thickness, and contain the remains of Encrini, Products, Euomphali, and Spirifers. In the face of the cliff are many caverns, some of which have not been formed by the sea, but simply enlarged by it, in consequence of the water washing out the clay contained in them. At the Green Bridge a brook loses itself in a cavern, which has been traced underground 360 yards, and then terminates in a hole eight yards deep. At the distance of about a mile the brook reappears on the coast between Pendine Cliffs and Marcroes Mountain.
(B) Limestone South of the Coal-basin. 
This district is subdivided into three distinct bands, which are separated from one another by the intervention of the Pembroke and Orielton districts of old red sandstone.
Tenby Limestone Band. 
This band supports the coal-measures from Langum Ferry to Tenby, and rests on the old red sandstone of the Ridgeway from Carew to Holloways. At Carew the band bifurcates, the western branch passing by Nash to the New Dock-yard at Patterchurch, being bounded on the south by the Pembroke district of old red sandstone, and on the north by the rock of Cosheston Mountain.
The north-western branch extends by the quarries of Carew-Newton to Langum Ferry, being bounded on the south-west from Carew to Lawrenny by a branch of Milford Haven, but at Lawrenny and at Langum Ferry by old red sandstone. From Langum Ferry to Johnston no limestone appears along the boundary of the Coal-basin, this being the line along which trap is protruded, and the coal-measures upon that line being very much disturbed. At Johnston, however, the limestone reappears on the northern side of the hill between the trap and the coal-measures, being very much contorted, and occupying a tract about fifty yards broad, and about three-quarters of a mile in length.
From Johnston eastwards no limestone appears, until we reach the shores of St. Bride's Bay, where, in Gouldtrop Road, two or three beds of that rock, not above twenty feet in thickness, are observed between trap and contorted coal-measures. (See PI. II. fig. 2.) A continuation, probably, of these beds is seen forced up above the level of the sea, below Gouldtrop Head, at some short distance further to the westward. (See same Plate and figure.)
The stratification of this band of limestone, along its whole line, is very much disturbed. At Tenby, behind the sluice-wall, the limestone beds are thrown quite over, so as to appear to rest upon the coal-measures. On the south side of the small bay, of which Castle Hill forms the northern side, the almost vertical beds have a northern dip. A few thin contorted beds are there interposed between other beds that remain tabular. At St. Catherine's Island, opposite this bay, some beds are vertical; others dip to the south, their cleavages occasioning a deceptive appearance of vertical strata trending north and south. From the cliff under the Paragon to that under the Windmill the beds dip to the south at from 70° . At Holloways the dip is to the north-east at 30P; at St. Florence, to the east at from 20° to 23°; at Ivy Tower, to the south at from 30° to 40°; and at Carew, to the south-south-east at 45°. The limestone is seen at one place only in the cliffs near Patterchurch, where it has the appearance of resting on the basset-edges of old red sandstone. North of Langum Ferry-house the limestone is so much contorted and intermixed with the coal-measures, that sometimes one formation is uppermost, and sometimes the other.
Pembroke Band of Limestone. To the south of that of Tenby another band of limestone is found, extending from West Angle on the west, to Giltar and Lidstip Points on the east. It lies in a trough or hollow formed by the dipping beneath it on either side of the old red sandstone belonging to the Pembroke and Orielton divisions of sandstone.
At West Angle there is an excellent section of the western end of this trough, the beds resting conformably on the sandstone on either side, but being contorted in the intermediate parts. (See PI. II. fig. 3.) The limestone near Pwlychrocan is almost concealed by diluvium, containing rolled pieces of the sandstone and limestone: it may be seen, however, at Greenhill Farm, Upper Hentland Farm, and Eastlington Mill*. The character of this band of limestone, as occupying a trough, is well displayed at Pembroke, which lies in the middle of the hollow. At a small cliff to the west of Bentlas, near Pembroke, the limestone dips to the north at an angle of 70°, and at the opposite side of the river, near East Pennar Farm, to the south at 80°. At Hodgeston the beds are highly inclined, with a drift from west-north-west to east-south-east. At Rock Farm, to the north of Jamestown, they dip to the south at about 60°. In Manorbeer Bay and at Lidstip Point they are vertical, with a drift from west-by-north to east-by-south. At the cove north of Old Castle Head the vertical limestone abuts against the sandstone. In the lane between Lidstip and Penally, near Druselton Farm, the limestone dips to the south at 45°, and in the cliff behind the same farm to the same point of the compass at 80°.
St. Margaret's Island and the northern half of Caldy Island form the continuation of the limestone of the Pembroke trough. The strata there are nearly vertical.
To the north and south of the limestone of this trough, between the limestone and the old red sandstone, wherever a good section is afforded, the slaty beds of the lower limestone-shale are to be discovered. This is particularly observable in West Angle Cliffs, at Grove and East Pennar Farms, and at a small cove between Shrinkle Farm and Old Castle Head. Wherever the shale is exposed to the sea, small coves are formed, as the shale yields more readily to the action of the waves than the limestone- and sandstone-rocks which bound it. The bottom of the deep indenture in the west side of Caldy Island is formed in the continuation of the slaty beds of the cove to the north of Old Castle Head; and the same beds traverse the island from west to east. They become less calcareous as they approach the old red sandstone.
The remains of Encrini, Corals, Productae, and Euomphali are found in the limestone of the Pembroke band.
This is the southernmost of the three bands belonging to the limestone on the southern side of the coal-basin, and it forms the southern extremity of the Pembroke peninsula. The beds of limestone in this band vary from a few inches to six or seven feet in thickness: they may be seen of. the former dimensions at Linney Head, and of the latter at St. Goven's Head. The lower limestone-shale separates the limestone from the old red sandstone, as may be seen in a cove north of Stackpole Quay. Encrinites and Productae occur in some of the beds of this band of limestone.
The sands extending from Newton Burrows to Linney Farm conceal the junction of the limestone with the old red sandstone. Near Linney Head the strata of limestone are horizontal; at St. Goven's Head they dip gently towards the south. In many parts of the band the strata are greatly disturbed: they are contorted near the Eligug Stack* (see PI. II. fig. 4.); they are vertical and contorted near Stackpole Quay (see PI. II. fig. 5.); and at a short distance to the north of the latter place they abut perpendicularly against old red sandstone.
Between Linney and St. Goven's Heads there is some fine picturesque scenery. The coast is indented in a most singular manner. Cauldrons, similar to the far-famed Boilers of Buchan, near Peterhead in Scotland, are found in three or four places. One or two occur near Linney Head; another on the western part of Bullslaughter Bay; and the most celebrated, named Bocheston Meer, to the west of St. Goven's Chapel. When the sea rushes into them during a heavy gale of wind, the noise is heard to a considerable distance. The cliffs are tenanted by multitudes of sea-birds, whose clamour adds much to the wild effect of the scenery.
§ 5.—COAL-MEASURES. 
Along the northern boundary of this western extremity of the great SouthWelsh coal-basin, the coal-measures rest, from Broadhaven in St. Bride's Bay to the lime-quarries near Maudlin Bridge, upon greywacke: from those quarries to Milling, upon carboniferous limestone: at Slebech, on greywacke: at Mynwer, on old red sandstone: and from Newton Quarries to the cove between Pendine Cliffs and Marcroes Mountain, on carboniferous limestone. The coal-measures are bounded on the south, at Gouldtrop Road in St. Bride's Bay, by a thin stratum of carboniferous limestone, which intervenes between them and the trap: from Rosepool to Walwin's Castle and Tiers Cross, by a narrow dyke of trap, which separates them from old red sandstone: from Tiers Cross to Anneykell and Bolton Farms, by the trap of Bolton Beacon: at Johnston, by carboniferous limestone interposed between them and the trap: at Craneham, Clarisson, and Nash, by trap-rocks : at Langum, by old red sandstone: and from Langum Ferry to Tenby, by carboniferous limestone. Excepting along the eastern portion of their northern boundary, these coalmeasures have been greatly disturbed. Their contortions may be seen in St. Bride's Bay at the cliffs extending from the hill north of Broadhaven to Gouldtrop Road, where as they approach the trap they are most curiously twisted (see PI. II. fig. 2.); and in Caermarthen Bay at the cliffs extending from Tenby to Sandersfoot (see PI. II. fig. 6.). The most remarkable contortions are at Monk's Stone Point near Tenby, represented in the adjoining figure.
Stone-coal, or culm, is the only variety of coal that occurs in Pembrokeshire, bituminous coal being altogether wanting in the district. The beds of stonecoal usually worked will be seen in the following section of the collieries belonging to I. M. Child, Esq. at Begelly, a village situate nearly midway between the southern and northern boundaries of the basin, on the road from Tenby to Narberth. The dip is to the south-west or south-south-west, at about one in three.
Upon a flat between the villages of Begelly and Jefferston there are some singular basin-shaped masses of stone-coal. The easternmost was discovered in 1818. It resembles in shape a semi-oval, the section passing through the longer axis. Its length from east to west is about one hundred and forty yards; its breadth from north to south, forty yards; its depth, ten yards. This mass of stone-coal is covered to the depth of two feet by yellow clay, containing rounded pieces of compact siliceous grit: it rests also upon clay.
At the distance of twenty yards to the west-north-west of the above, a similar basin of stone-coal is now worked, which is probably of nearly the same dimensions with the former; but its limits are not yet exactly ascertained. Three similar basins, though very small, are found to the west and north of the second. All these are covered by clay containing rounded pieces of grit. It is difficult to account for these basins, since in their immediate neighbourhood the strata dip gently to the south-west.
At several places on the southern and northern limits of the basin the lowest of the coal-measures are very thick, and consist of a very compact quartzose sandstone, equivalent probably to the millstone grit of other coal-fields. A bed of this rock occurs above the limestone at Gouldtrop Road; large blocks of it are found at Rosepool; it intervenes between coal-shale and old red sandstone at Langum; is contorted together with limestone at Langum Ferry; and is seen on the edge of the coal-measures at Lawrenny Newton. These very thick quartzose beds do not appear at Tenby; siliceous grit of moderate thickness, and shale containing two or three beds of limestone, forming there the lowest of the coal-measures. The shale and limestone are seen between the sluice-wall and the descent to the bathing machines. On the northern edge of the coal-basin, from Mynwer to that part of Marcroes Mountain which faces Pendine Cliffs, large blocks of compact quartzose sandstone are found on the surface; and in Pendine Cliffs seven or eight beds of that rock are seen supporting the other coal-measures.
To the north of the western termination in St. Bride's Bay of the great coal-basin, but separated from it by greywacke, a smaller coal district occurs, which is probably connected with the great basin by intermediate submarine strata, lapping round the greywacke of Druson. This district is bounded on the west by the shores of St. Bride's Bay from Newgate Bridge to Druson Haven. On the north-east it runs up from Brawdy Mill nearly to Eweston, but it does not rise the hill at Broomhill, nor that above Brawdy Mill. The tongue of land coming down from Eweston, and the valleys on either side, belong to it. For the other limits of this district I refer to the Map. (PI. I.)
Excepting a small space between Bathesland and Roche, where trap is intruded, the whole of this smaller district is bounded by greywacke. The coal-measures are often contorted, and at Druson Haven are set rather abruptly on greywacke. (See PI. II. fig. 1.) Like the measures of the principal basin, they yield only stone-coal.
