II.—On the Lias of the Coast, in the Vicinity of Lyme Regis, Dorset. BY H. T. DE LA BECHE, ESQ. F.R., L. and G. S.S. ETC. 
[Read November 21st, 1823.]
IN a former communication to the Geological Society I presented an outline of the features of the coast in the vicinity of Lyme Regis; but having there described the lias only in a general manner, it is my present purpose to offer a more detailed account of that formation, as I am not acquainted with any situation where its geological structure and composition, and the organic remains which it contains, can be better studied. The relative position of the cliffs referred to in the following description is represented in the section connected with my former paper upon this subject:—And the annexed sketch (PI. III. fig. 1) represents the order of superposition of the inferior oolite sands, the lias formation, and the upper beds of the red marl, as they appear in the section between Down Cliff and Culverhole Point; the beds being supposed to be placed horizontally above each other, and the superincumbent chalk and green-sand removed.
The uppermost beds of the lias rise from beneath the sands of the inferior oolite at Down Cliff, on the west of Bridport Harbour; where a section is afforded of about one hundred and eighty feet of sand, in which large flattened masses of limestone occur, containing Pectens, Belemnites, Terebratuke, &c. These sands are calcareo-siliceous, their colour is a ferruginous yellow, and they contain an abundance of mica in their lower parts. A bed of grey marl occurs in them about one hundred feet above the commencement of the lias.
The calcareous beds of the inferior oolite are not exposed in the section at Down Cliff; but they are found resting on the sands, in the continuation of the same hill, on the northern side of the London Road, being there worked at what are usually named the Chidiock Quarries.
It is unnecessary to trace the oolite more to the eastward, it being sufficient for my present purpose to show, that the sands which rest on the lias marl at Down Cliff belong to that stratum.
The LIAS, in the tract about to be described, may be divided into three portions : the first, and uppermost, consisting principally of beds of marl; the second, to which the denomination Lias has usually been confined, of thin beds of limestone alternating with clay; and the third, composed chiefly of marl beds immediately incumbent on the red marl or newer-sandstone formation. I shall describe each of these divisions in the order of this enumeration.
I. The UPPER LIAS MARLS occupy a large extent of coast, forming the base of Down Cliff, the whole of the cliffs beneath the green-sand at Golden Cap, Shorne Cliff, and the greater part of Black Ven. The upper strata of these marls, as exhibited at Down Cliff, contain a considerable quantity of mica; but this character does not extend any great thickness, for the marls on the beach between the little hamlet of Sea-town and Golden Cap do not contain that mineral. Those portions of the marl which have fallen over from above, from the place where these beds come into contact with the green sand at Golden Cap, are also micaceous, being the continuation of the marls at the base of Down Cliff.
Numerous organic remains are found in the marls on the shore, between Sea-town and the rocky points projecting into the sea under Golden Cap: the most abundant are belemnites, which, though they occur throughout the greater part of the lias formation in the vicinity of Lyme, are nowhere so abundant as in the upper marls. The Ammonites Bechei of Sowerby is also a common fossil in the same situation; which likewise affords Terebratuhe, Trochus anglicus, T. imbricatus, Ammonites Grenovii, Pentacrinites subangularis (of Miller), disjointed portions of Pentacrinites Briareus, lignite, the rare remains of an echinite, the bones of Ichthyosaurus tenuirostris, &c.
The thickness of the marl exhibited at Golden Cap must be about two hundred feet; which, placed upon the three hundred feet of marls exposed in the lower part of Black Ven, would give five hundred feet as the probable thickness of this portion of the lias in the vicinity of Lyme: the marly beds at Shorne Cliff and in the upper portion of Black Ven being a continuation of those of Golden Cap. The following list details the beds, in a descending order, in the section disclosed at the base of Black Ven.
Organic remains are abundant in some parts of the lias marl:—flattened ammonites occur in some of the slaty varieties; but the best preserved specimens of that genus are found in the rounded nodules of argillaceous limestone which occur within the marls.—These are of various species; such as A. obtusus, A. armatus, A. stellaris, &c. Plicated terebratulae are also common. And the marls also contain the remains of Ichthyosauri, Plesiosauri, Pentacrinites, lignite, &c. The Gryphaea incurvaand Plagiostoma gigantea, though found in the marly beds, are more abundant in the limestones of the lias.
II. The LIAS LIMESTONES may be said to commence with a series of thin beds varying from earthy to compact, and alternating with thin beds of marl. They rise from beneath the marls on the western side of Black Ven, and continue from thence to the Church-Cliffs immediately on the east of Lyme; but four or five small faults throw them down, and prevent their rising so high at Lyme as they otherwise would have done: and at that place there must be a considerable fault,—probably in the line of the long ledge, dry at low water, which extends into the sea opposite the eastern part of the town; since the lias marls are there again brought down nearly to the level of the sea, and are continued from the town to the western side of the Cobb.—It is clearly seen that this marl is not inferior to the limestones of the Church-Cliffs (between the Cobb and the town of Lyme); for both the marls and the limestones can be identified on each side of the town.
From a short distance west of the Cobb, to Seven-rock Point, the lias limestones are exposed at the lower part of the cliff; and the cliffs afford a nearly complete section of them, between Seven-rock Point and the large fault at the bottom of Pinhay Bay. The lias marls come close down to the point; after which the following beds occur, in a descending order:
Several faults are observable in the strata of the lias formation, between the rise of the four-foot marl bed beneath Black Ven, and Culverhole Point; ten such faults at least, of various extent, being exposed to view, and many more probably concealed beneath the fallen masses of chalk and green sand. In several places these fissures may be traced to a considerable distance among the horizontal ledges of rock which are dry at low water; and in one instance the termination of the crack constituting the fault is discernible on the shore near Seven-rock Point. This fissure, which is easily recognised in the cliff, is visible for some distance, running out towards the sea; but after continuing for several yards in an uniform direction, the beds unite, and at that place form a considerable curvature. The fault at the bottom of Pinhay Cliff is represented in PI. III. fig. 2. 
VOL. II.—SECONO SERIES. E
On the west of the fault in Pinhay Bay the limestones are thrown down about the thickness of the great bed of white lias; the dark marl beneath that bed, on the east of the fault, being in a line with the upper part of the white lias on the west of it: but after being thus thrown down, the strata rise again towards the west, so that the upper beds of the subjacent red marl emerge from beneath them near Humble Rock. Between that place and Culverhole Point the lias beds come down again to the level of the shore, and are there visible, for the last time on this part of the coast, above the red marl.
III. The beds which occur between the white lias limestones and the upper light blueish-green beds of the marl belonging to the new red sandstone formation, and which complete the section of the lias, are best exposed at Culverhole Point, under Dowlands.—They are as follow:
Section of the LOWER MARL beds of the Lias, at Culver hole Point. 
From the sections above given it would appear, that the lias formation in the vicinity of Lyme Regis consists of an alternation of more than seventytwo beds of limestone, with an equal number of marl beds, amounting together to about one hundred and ten feet in thickness, and surmounted by about five hundred feet of marl.

IV. The lias limestones in the vicinity of Lyme contain numerous organic remains, among which those of the Ichthyosaurus and Plesiosaurus are the most remarkable; and these are found principally in the marls alternating with the limestones. The characteristic fossils of the lias,—as the Gryphaea incurva, Ammonites Bucklandi, and Plagiostoma gigantea, are by no means uncommon here, and most generally occur in the limestone beds.
The following is a list of the fossils found in the lias formation, generally, of this neighbourhood:
ORGANIC REMAINS contained in the Lias Formation, in the Vicinity 
The total thickness of the red marl beds exposed between Culverhole and Axmouth Points may be about one hundred and twenty feet; the section exhibiting a few small faults, and a considerable curvature of the strata. After numerous alternations of blueish-green and red marl, the latter colour gradually becomes predominant, with a few occasional patches of green. The blueish-green patches, in the lower part of the section above given, afford traces of gypsum.
