
III.—Observations on the Strata at Hastings, in Sussex. By THOMAS WEBSTER, ESQ., SECRETARY TO THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY. 
[Read June 4th 1824.]
A HE sea-cliffs on each side of the town of Hastings exhibit a section of the beds which lie below the clay of the wealds of Kent, Surrey, and Sussex, and furnish a key to understanding the structure of the high country which is surrounded by this clay and has hitherto been but imperfectly explored. In the present communication, I propose to give some account of the line of coast extending from the White Rock on the west of Hastings to Cliff End near to Winchelsea on the east.
Along this extent (PI. V.) several valleys of denudation occur, which have separated the cliff into different portions. One of these valleys divides the White Rock from the West Cliff on which are the ruins of the ancient castle; in another, which divides the East from the West Cliff, the town of Hastings is built. In the middle of East Cliff is the romantic valley where the stream called Eaglesbourne forms the well-known fish-ponds; and to the east of East Cliff, and between it and Fairlee Cliff, is the place called the Govers. At Cliff End the cliff terminates, and gives place to the valley that goes up to Winchelsea.
When we view this coast from the sea, we may perceive that the beds of rock form a vast, but irregular, arch, dipping at each end under the Weald clay, and rising in the middle to the greatest height in the neighbourhood of Hastings, where they may be advantageously studied.
In endeavouring to subdivide this mass of strata, a remarkable want of continuity and regularity may be noticed, which renders their examination difficult.
The distinguishing features in the detail appear to be, that in the upper part a hard grey-coloured calciferous sandstone abounds; the middle part consists mostly of a yellow soft friable sandstone; and the lower part is composed of beds of clay, shale, and ferruginous sandstone, with several layers of ironstone, and numerous fragments of carbonized vegetables.
The grey calciferous rock is that which, several years since, first drew my attention to the mineralogical nature of these cliffs. Many large blocks of it, sometimes 10 or 12 feet long, lie on the shore in a very picturesque manner, (See PI. VI, fig. 2, a, c,) and have evidently fallen from the top of the cliff: they are broken up for paving and mending the roads, for which purposes they prove an excellent material; by their colour they are easily distinguished from the common yellowish sandstone in which they are imbedded, and which often remains firmly attached to them even after they have fallen. 
These blocks of grey calciferous stone frequently have their upper and under surfaces distinctly mamillated, or formed of portions of spherical or spheroidal figures. It has been supposed by some who have noticed these fallen masses, that they have been worn into these forms by the action of the sea: but this is evidently not the case; since they are of the same shape while stiil lying in the sandstone cliff in places where the sea could not have reached them, the mamillary masses existing before the blocks were detached from the yellow sandstone. Fig. 1. (Plate VI.) represents a portion of this rock viewed looking towards the sea; and at b, b, b, 6, are seen the above-mentioned blocks in their places.
The sea does indeed frequently wear the surfaces of the blocks (and many of them are seen so worn), but in a very different manner. By the friction of the pebbles put in motion by the breakers, a number of hollows or concavities are worked out, intersecting each other, and separated by sharp ridges. These, (see c, fig. 2, Plate VI,) somewhat resemble casts taken from the mamillated surfaces; but in the rocks worn by the pebbles there are angular projecting ridges; in the others, there are angular depressions. This mamillary appearance is too regular and constant to be owing to accident, and can be attributed only to one of the varieties of crystalline action. The rock, when fresh broken, has a peculiar glistening lustre, which reminded me of the fracture of the crystallized sandstone of Fontainbleau, (the chaux carbonatee quartzifere of Haiiy). Like that substance, the mamillated rock of Hastings is a sandstone having a small quantity of carbonate of lime, which however, involving the sand, has been sufficient to occasion the concretionary structure. It is however remarkable, that the stone is composed of thin layers of sand parallel to the bases of the mamillary projections; from which it would seem, that those masses had at first been sand, and that the calcareous matter which obeyed the crystalline influence had been introduced, or at least diffused through it, subsequently.
From the size of the masses in the cliff, they often, at first sight, resemble beds alternating with the sandstone; and it is only by a close examination that their want of continuity and the very irregular nature of their distribution appears, which must be accounted for from their concretionary nature. The place where these mammillated masses are best seen is at White Rock, as they are there easily accessible while still in their original situations. One which I measured at that place exceeded 15 feet in length, being about 2 feet in thickness. Excellent examples also lie on the shore below East Cliff, from whence they have fallen; but they cannot be easily examined in situ at that place.
I have stated that they lie in the upper part of the series. At the White Rock they are on the level of the sea: going eastwards, they rise, and keep at the top of the Cliff (d, d, d). They do not occur in the West Cliff under the castle; and in the East Cliff they chiefly appear in the upper part, but are much more abundant near Eaglesbourne. They do not exist between the Govers and Cliff End; but at the latter place they are again seen (f,f), and are also found at Winchelsea.
Below this concretionary bed, at the White Rock (d, d), and at East Cliff (g. g). there is one of dark-coloured shale 10 or 12 feet thick; and a similar bed on the highest part of West Cliff, under the castle, belongs to the latter.
Underneath this shale, at the above places, is a very thick bed of soft sandstone (A, h, h, h), often extremely white, which gives the chief character to the cliffs of Hastings. Besides being strongly marked by horizontal lines on its surface, occasioned by the unequal hardness of the strata, it is divided vertically by numerous deep rents and fissures. Owing to these, and to the caves that had been worked in the lower part for procuring sand, together with the failure of the subjacent clay and shale on which it rests, large masses had frequently fallen, and so much endangered the houses beneath, that the entire face of the WestCliff has lately been cut down to prevent similar accidents; a circumstance that has materially injured the picturesque beauty of the rock, but has afforded the geologist a good opportunity of examining its nature. There are, however, but few circumstances respecting it to attract notice:—it is here very white and uniform, and is composed of siliceous grains having so little coherence that large blocks thrown down from the top by the workmen became mere sand on striking the bottom.
This thick bed of sandstone forms the middle of the East Cliff; but there, numerous and very large masses of the above-mentioned concretionary rock occur in the sandstone, and these increase in quantity towards the east end near Eaglesbourne. Beyond Eaglesbourne, this bed extends to the Govers, where it is seen breaking out in the sides of the valley, and also in the romantic spot called Lover's Seat, though I believe this to be its eastern boundary.
Below this thick mass of white sand are beds of slate-clay and shale (i, i, i, i), containing numerous thin layers of shivery ferruginous sandstone, together
VOL. II.—SECOND SERIES. 
with lignite and silicified wood. This has been well exposed at West Cliff in an artificial section which has been made to afford space for new buildings (k). In East Cliff this shale is very conspicuous (i, i); and as it here rises to the east, it is found considerably above the sea, at the east end, being there at about one-third the height of the cliff. It frequently contains indistinct impressions of plants, among which ferns may be distinguished, and bears upon the whole a considerable resemblance to some coal-shales. It becomes very thin towards Eaglesbourne, divides into several portions with partial beds of sandstone between, and is not distinctly traceable further in this direction.
Under this shale is another bed of sandstone (I, I), very different from that above. It has no calciferous concretions, contains always more or less oxide of iron, and has a tendency to separate into rhomboidal masses, being intersected by numerous veins of argillaceous iron-ore. This bed is best seen at East Cliff, in the west end of which it appears on the level of the beach. As it rises to the east it attains a great thickness; and in its lower parts are irregular layers of clay, sometimes white and approaching to pipeclay.
These interposed clays, increasing in thickness towards the east, occupy almost the whole of Lover's Seat and the high cliff of Fairlee, and are there sometimes stained with red. The lowest strata visible in this series consist of a dark-coloured shale, which is seen at the Govers and Cliff End (m, m), and contain small roundish masses of sandstone, together with several layers (two of them from 2 to 3 inches thick) of rich argillaceous iron-ore: with these are found abundant thin layers of lignite, and innumerable fragments of carbonized vegetables, among which ferns are recognisable. It is from these beds that the rich iron-ores of Sussex, which were formerly much worked, have in some instances been procured; and it was from the abundance of the iron, the beds of clay and shale with vegetable impressions, and the fragments of charcoal in the sandstones, that expectations had been formed of finding coal in this formation, before the difference between lignites and true coal was generally understood. On the west of Eaglesbourne this last bed rises in an arch to the height of about 12 feet, and then descends to the east; at Cliff End it re-appears, and may be traced at low water forming a ledge.
Although the calciferous rock is the uppermost bed in these cliffs, yet inland, on ascending the high ground towards Fairlee Down, thick beds of clay and yellowish sand are seen, which appear to be superior to it in geological position; and I believe a portion of the strata immediately behind the White Rock, that is very highly inclined (n, n, Plate V.), belongs to this.
The cliffs at Hastings are not rich in organic remains. In the calciferous sandstone, the only indications of shells I have seen are the impressions and casts of a small bivalve, which occur rather abundantly, but which are generally in too imperfect a state to enable the naturalist to decide to what species they belong; together with a few casts of an univalve resembling those found in the Petworth and Purbeck marbles, and which have usually been considered as fresh-water shells, perhaps Paludinre. These fossils are sometimes also found in the sandstone not calciferous.
Besides the vegetable remains which I have already mentioned as so plentiful in the lower beds of sandstone and shaly clay, portions of the silicified stems of monocotyledonous plants are frequently found in these cliffs, of a character that deserves well the attention of the botanist. All the pieces I have seen (and they are often found on the beach) are somewhat flattened, and have longitudinal cavities of two kinds, which evidently belong to the structure of the plant: the first small, sinuous, and communicating with each other; the second much larger, but frequently compressed. Both are lined with beautiful minute and transparent crystals of pyramidal quartz, the colour of the whole being blackish brown.
In masses of the rock that have fallen from the East Cliff, I found, in 1812, numerous fragments of the ribs of large Saurian animals, one of which I placed in the collection of the Geological Society: but I am indebted to the liberality of George Cumberland, Esq., for the use of the following drawings of organic remains found by him in these cliffs.
Fig. 5. Plate VI. represents several teeth in a portion of a jaw. They are conical and polished. I have not been able to ascertain to what animal they belong, but they have considerable analogy to those of the Lizard tribe.
Fig. 6. represents the same teeth magnified. The upper part (seen again at fig. 7.), may be easily detached, and seems like a capping of a transparent substance. It is proper to add that I found the same kind of teeth in the Purbeck beds at Swanwich.
I may mention here (although it is evidently postdiluvian) the remains of what is usually called a submarine forest, which is to be seen at low water between White Rock and the West Cliff. Numerous trunks of trees lie flat, the wood partly black and partly of the natural colour: they are accompanied by great quantities of hazel-nuts.
From the character of the calciferous mammillary rock above described, and its organic remains, connected with the geography of the country, I have no doubt of the identity of the beds forming the cliffs at Hastings with the rock that occurs in Tilgate Forest andCuckfleld, so rich in fossil bones: but from an examination of the first of these strata on an extensive line of coast in Dorsetshire, where from their highly inclined position they are well displayed, I have been much struck with the want of agreement in the details of the sections at different places. Although the strongly coloured clays and sandstones of this series may be easily recognised, yet the irregularities are so great, that it is evident the subdivisions, or separate members of this formation, are of very limited extent.
