IV. Particular Remarks on the internal chambered Cone of the Belemnite. 
It appears that the part of the animal's body which was once contained in the outer chamber secreted a thin layer of a spathose fibrous texture, and that a thin coat resembling nacre but not iridescent, covered the fibrous spathose layer externally and internally, and cemented the whole strongly together. It is evident that the external nacreous investment of this first lamina forming the chambered cone, could not be formed by that portion of the animal which was within the cone, but was secreted by parts encompassing it. The exterior surface of the cone is, however, less smooth than the interior, and offers thereby an admirable contrivance for its adhesion to the sides of the guard; proving also, clearly, that it does not result from the same portions of the animal which form the guard, and that this was formed subsequently.
As the portion of the animal within the cone increased in size, so it enlarged its encompassing shell at the upper margin, at the same time forming a transverse concave thin lamina at a short distance from the bottom of its shell, and carrying its sides for some height upwards, thereby affixing the lamina and strengthening the sides of the conical shell. Thus an inner chamber was formed, from which the animal was completely excluded, and with which it only communicated by its siphuncle extending on one side into it. The siphuncle appears to have been encompassed by a spathose lamina connected above and below with the transverse one, and affixing laterally to the conical shell.
Each transverse septum is composed of three or four spathose laminae, separated from each other by the investing nacreous layers just described. The sides of the upper laminae are carried up to nearly the same point where those of the first formed laminae terminate: each, however, successively becomes a little shorter, and thereby forms a circular rim on which the transverse lamina forming the next chamber rests. Hence there results a series of concave cups, whose edffes take a conical direction and whose sides adhere to a thin encompassing conical shell, thereby strengthening the latter, and forming an assemblage of chambers, through the whole of which the siphuncle extends.
These laminae exhibit throughout a fibrous and spathose structure, the direction of the fibres always forming radii to the curvature of the part. They are covered above and below with a nacreous investment, which being opaque or differing in colour, exhibits when the shell is dissolved in diluted acid clear traces of the animal matter forming fine pellicles. The preservation of these pellicles appears to me to afford an argument in confirmation of my views,— that .the intermediate layers of fibrous spar belonged to the original texture of the shell, and are not the result of subsequent infiltration; otherwise it appears probable that in the progress of crystallization these pellicles would have been disarranged and obliterated.
Several circumstances induce me to believe that the last or outer chamber of the conical shell could at no time have possessed any great depth; for the thin parietes of the conical shell could have acquired but little additional strength from the extension of the edges of the last septum; and had they therefore projected far beyond it, so frail a fabric would have been liable to be squeezed in by the lateral pressure of the water. Indeed, a section of a perfect specimen imbedded in its matrix, in my possession, in which the termination of the parietes of tlie upper chamber is distinctly to be traced running to a sharp edge, confirms this fact,—that the outer chamber was like the rest, very shallow.
The chambered shell appears also from this and several other specimens to have considerably extended above and beyond the upper extremity of the guard. Hence we may conclude that the casts of large chambers often found separate, do not indicate that the guard was of equal size. From the shell being frequently traversed by numerous septa, it acquired a considerable degree of strength and a power of resistance to the pressure of the surrounding water, whilst it aided the locomotive power of the animal by its buoyancy.

V. Particular Remarks on the Structure of the external Guard or Sheath of the Belemnite. 
The form of the guard or sheath varies in different species. In some it ia fusiform, in others conical; in some slightly elongated, in others it is of considerable length; in some it has a round, in others an elliptical circumference. Its termination is either acutely pointed, or conical; either compressed, or mamillated; and sometimes the apex is slightly aduncated. Some species have one, and others two or three longitudinal grooves. The surface of some is smooth, in others it is slightly granulated; and on some species we may trace impressions which evidently betray marks of muscles which have clasped or encompassed this part of the Belemnite, and show the impressions of branching vessels.
Some species are semitransparent, others are opaque: in the former we may observe that the guard is formed of two or three nearly equal longitudinal portions, and along the line marking their adhesion the Belemnite easily separates by a slight blow with a hammer, or by being heated and afterwards moistened with cold water. By the same means a similar organization may be discovered in the opaque ones. The edges of these longitudinal portions are irregularly waved, and adhere closely together.
A longitudinal or transverse fracture of the guard, shows that it is formed of several concentrically superposed laminae perfectly corresponding with those in the chambered cone; each similarly formed of an arrangement of spathose fibrous crystals forming radii to its curvature, and also covered and cemented together by a very thin nacreous investment, which by being of a less pellucid appearance affords a mark which enables us to trace the thickness of each lamina.
The circumstance above stated with regard to the division of the belemnitic guard into two or three longitudinal portions, may perhaps authorise the conjecture, that its laminae were secreted in these separate parts by two or three distinct longitudinal portions or flaps of the animal, laterally touching each other, with irregular edges from whence resulted the irregular suture.
As the animal, by its situation in the first chamber of the conical multilocular shell, cannot form the guard in any other manner than by apposition of its laminae externally, it is rendered thereby certain that this must have been effected by portions of the animal protruding over the edge of the upper chamber, and encompassing the whole of the exterior both of the shell and the guard.
I have before expressed my opinion, that the laminae of radiating spar interposed between the nacreous layers of the chambered portion, belong to the original organization of the shell, and had not been introduced by subsequent infiltration; and I must here repeat the same opinion with regard to the similar laminae of the guard. If we consider the system of nacreous layers alone, abstractedly from the intervening sparry matter, the guard would exhibit a texture greatly resembling the bone of the cuttle-fish (Sepia officinalis Linn.); namely, a series of concentric calcareous layers, separated by very narrow intervals, and held together by transverse fibres: and such in fact is the appearance it often presents when the sparry matter is removed by partial decomposition. But I cannot persuade myself, that if the spathose substance had been subsequently introduced by infiltration into the cavernous intervals of such a structure, it would have there shot into radiating crystals, without obliterating and destroying all traces of the frail intervening plates. I think that I am able to show that such an obliteration of the internal structure has taken place (with the exception of a few cases) in the instance of echinital and crinoidal remains, which by their conversion into an uniform and peculiar modification of calcareous spar, would afford a case analogous to that of the Belemnite, should we consider the sparry state as superinduced in it.
I may mention, in support of the opinion here expressed, that the large tubular shell found in the Eastern seas, and called by Lamarck Septaria arenaria, is composed of radiating crystals of carbonate of lime. This instance is important in illustration of my theory, as showing the actual existence of such a structure in the shell of a living animal.
VI. Effects of Decomposition on the Shell of the Belemnite. 
In many shells, such as Nautili, Ammonites, and Trochi, the common calcareous outer part yields more easily to decomposition than the iridescent nacreous internal coating*. We see instances of this in the thin iridescent flattened scales of Ammonites found at Watchet, which are the remains of partly dissolved shells.
In the Belemnite, however, it appears that the nacreous portion yielded to decomposition more readily than the spathose parts.
The proofs of this are to be found in the frequent separation of the guard from the chambered cone. These parts were originally connected by nacreous matter, and it is the decay of this matter which has caused them to separate. The further process of decomposition acting on this cavity, produces a groove along the line between the two portions of the guard.
The central canal, which on breaking the Belemnite is sometimes found to traverse the axis of the guard, and which has been considered by some writers as a channel for nerves or vessels, and by others as a continuation of the siphuncle, is also to be attributed to decomposition.
There is no connexion whatever between this channel and the chambered portion, which is completely invested and surrounded by the inclosing shell. The manner of its formation appears to me to be, that the nacreous layer which is deposited between each of the spathose ones, is continued at the apex of the guard into a prolonged point, so as to reach the succeeding nacreous layer; and this substance having decayed while the spathose part remained unaltered, a continuous channel has been formed.
Decomposition also shows itself sometimes in removing the calcareous matter, cementing together the longitudinal portions of the guard, and sometimes we find that particular layers of the calcareous matter are attacked (perhaps from some peculiarity in their composition making them more liable to decay): and thus a separation takes place between the outer portion of the series of layers and those within the decayed layer. The inner portion is what at an earlier stage of growth was the whole of the belemnitic guard. The outer portion has, from such a decay, an accidental cavity, which may be distinguished from the cavity of the chambered part by its difference in form; the accidental cavity being of the form of a more elongated cone, and having also frequently a projecting point arising from matter accidentally indurated in the central canal, above noticed, as having been mistaken for the continuation of the siphuncle.
In some fragments of Belemnites, two conical cavities have been observed; one of these is undoubtedly the cavity of the chambered shell, the other has arisen from the accidental falling out of a portion of the guard.
On immersing the guard in dilute acid, we discover that animal matter intervenes in small quantity between the fibrous crystals.
If, as I have supposed, the guard was originally of a crystalline structure, it would certainly present great obstacles to decomposition. This is indeed proved by the shells of the genus Pinna; the only ones, I believe, which, having a texture resembling that of the Belemnites, are found both in a recent and a fossil state. The fossil Pinnae found in the lower beds of the London clay at Bognor, and in the Paris beds, retain distinctly the same structure as the recent ones.
The fibrous shell so frequent in the oolite (supposed to be an oyster and described as Ostrea Trichites, but evidently from its peculiar organization belonging to a distinct genus) and the Inoceramus of the chalk, presents a fibrous and more or less crystalline texture, which in these cases no one has ever doubted to have belonged to them in their original state.
I have seen, in the collection of Richard Bright, Esq., many specimens where Belemnites had been imbedded in flint, and have been dissolved out; and in the hollows which they had occupied, are remaining siliceous casts of those spherical bodies with connecting fibres which the Rev. W. D. Conybeare has described in the 3rd volume of the Geological Transactions as resulting from the infiltration of silex into cavities formed by some boring animal. Mr. Allan has also figured these bodies in Belemnites in the Edinburgh Transactions. In Mr. Bright's specimens, some small portions of the radiating calcareous spar of the guard of the Belemnite are remaining among the connecting siliceous threads.
Von Tressau observes, as a proof of the indestructibility of the Belemnites, that those found in iron mines along with Ammonites and Nautili, have sustained no change, whilst the latter are converted into ochre.
The Belemnite in fact rarely occurs otherwise than with such a texture as may present on fracture a fibrous spathose organization; and where this has been penetrated by silex or other mineral substances, it has always, and but with only one exception, destroyed its peculiar formation.
In the Lyas and Lyas-clay, pyrites frequently enters the chambered cone, which on account of its more fragile construction it is able to attack, whilst the guard resists its operation. Sometimes we meet with the shell of the chambered cone in a semi-decomposed state, involved in pyrites, and flattened as far as it projected beyond the guard, or as far as its latest formed and adhering lamina? were unable to resist the pressure of incumbent matter. In other instances we obtain a beautiful conical pyritic cast showing marks of the rim of the concave septa (the outer shell of the cone being destroyed), and the situation of the siphuncle in a series of indentures, which from a hasty and mistaken analogy have been once considered as the spiracula of the Belemnite.
I possess a Belemnite in chert from Dantzic, which is converted into chalcedony, and where the fibrous structure of the shell is entirely destroyed. The chalcedony has assumed its own mineral figure, and has a mamillatcd surface in the cavity once occupied by the chambered cone. A transverse fracture shows a few concentric markings common to chalcedonic nodules.
Miss Benett of Norton House is in possession of a few specimens of Belemnites minimus, from near Warminster, (much resembling Parkinson's representation in the 3rd volume of Org. Rem. PI. IV. fig. 14.) which have experienced the changes so often exhibited by the fossils imbedded in green-sand, and which have gradually silicified. It is owing to the kindness of that lady that I have been able to examine these Belemnites carefully. They exhibit in their present state externally a few thin conical lamellae superimposed on each other, and adhering by transverse fibres somewhat analogous to the structure of the common cuttle-fish, and are in many instances hollow in the centre. My explanation of this structure is, that these now siliceous lamella; have replaced the nacreous layers; and that the intervening fibrous crystalline substance, as well as the lamellae forming once the centre of the guard, have disappeared by decomposition. Belemnites of this kind are very rare; and it is interesting that some of these show the same irregular cavities as I noticed in a calcareous specimen in Mr. Greenough's possession, similar to the one figured in Knorr (Vol. m. Supp. iv. f. fig. 8.).
Accident furnished another clue to the illustration of the cavities in the specimens referred to, ascribed to the mere dropping out of certain portions of the laminae by decomposition. I observed on the surface of a few specimens of Belemnites from the oolite at Dundry, some circular markings, occasionally one within the other, having an irregular floriform petal-shaped and sometimes subvermicular circumference, similar to those represented in Knorr (Vol. n. part ii. Pl. I. fig. 5.); which Walch there considers as marks occasioned by worms or decomposition. On exposing one of these Belemnites to the action of nitric acid, to detect the animal gluten, I found to my surprise that these markings were a siliceous insinuation, sometimes extending in most delicate fibres between the crystals forming the laminae. These circular figures on calcareous and siliceous shells are by no means uncommon; and I was pleased to detect them also in the silicized Belemnites in Miss Benett's collection.

VII. Chemical Analysis of the Belemnite.
No alumine could be detected by succinate of ammonia. I have no doubt that the different species of Belemnites would furnish different analyses, but am at present prevented from going into these details.
On immersing the Belemnite in diluted nitric acid, I detected the interlacing animal matter exhibiting appearances similar to those in nacreous shells. A stronger acid tore the fibres asunder, coloured the solution yellow, and evolved a very pleasant smell resembling that of Cerambix moschatus. On scraping or burning the Belemnite, it evolves a smell by no means unpleasant. On exposure to fire, the crystalline laminae lose their water of crystallization, and assume an opaque, white, fibrous, submargaritaceous appearance.
In those early periods of science in which almost every substance of singular form was supposed to possess occult medical qualities, the Belemnite was considered as a protector against several complaints. Dr. Woodward informs us, that in Gloucestershire they use it pulverized in watery affections of the eyes of the horse, by blowing it into them. It is also used internally in nephritic cases. In Prussia they use it pulverized in the dressing of wounds.
VIII. Conjectures oh the Form of the Inhabitant of the Belemnite. 
There can be no room to hesitate in agreeing with Cuvier and Lamarck, that the Belemnite belonged to the cephalopodous division of Mollusca. The identity of structure in the chambered portion with the other genera of multilocular shells is alone sufficient to prove this; and we shall presently find additional confirmation of the same fact. The cephalopodous division of Mollusca consists only of two subdivisions, nearly allied to each other in the general circumstances of their structure; namely, the Nautilacea and Sepiacea. The former are provided with multilocular shells, probably intended as an apparatus to regulate the animal's buoyancy: but of this subdivision, only one genus, the Spirula, has been examined with anatomical precision, and it therefore remains involved in much obscurity. The second subdivision, the Sepiacea, have no shell; but in lieu of it, a complex laminated calcareous mass (somewhat improperly termed bone, and well known in commerce as cuttle-fish bone,) exists in the genus Sepia, and a horny plate in the genus Loligo. The former may very possibly, like the multilocular shells, assist, by its porous and cellular structure, to render the animal more buoyant; but the latter can scarcely answer any other purpose than giving, a support to the contiguous muscles. The animal of the Belemnite probably formed an intermediate class of the order, uniting the internal multilocular shell of the Spirula with the laminated calcareous mass of the Sepia, to which the belemnitic guard appears to correspond, as it is formed in a manner exactly similar; namely, by the apposition of successive laminae, of a concentric curvature, upon each other, in successive strata: the only difference being, that in the cuttle-fish those spaces are not closed and the edges of the laminae do not meet in a circle; whereas in the Belemnite, the parts secreting the shell, bending and closing round so as to embrace a conical surface, made the laminae assume the same direction and curvature. From the interstices between the laminae not having been empty, but, as I have supposed, filled with spar at the period when the animal formed the guard, I conjecture that the buoyancy of the animal must have been provided for by the chambered shell, and that the guard acted as a counterpoise to it.
With these views, I believe the inhabitant of the Belemnite to have been a Sepia-like animal, having a body of an abbreviated form partly inserted into the first chamber or aperture of the chambered cone, and connected to it by a duct extending from it to the end of the siphuncle. I further conceive, that a powerful circular muscle inclosed the chambered cone as far as the place where the laminae of the guard encompass it; and that another muscle extended on one side over the guard for its whole length, having laterally adhering to it on each side, a muscle provided with a secreting surface and capable of encompassing the guard. This form of the animal would admit the formation of the shell of the Belemnite, and correspond with the details its organization presents.
When the animal increased in size, it formed a new septum in front of the chambered cone, adding at the same time a new rim to the cone. Hereby its shell acquired a new chamber and a greater degree of buoyancy.
I believe it will be proved by further researches, that all chambered shells are inclosed in, or capable of being covered and encompassed by, the animal; for without such a contrivance, that nice degree of buoyancy which they are intended to furnish to the animal would be destroyed by the adhesion of parasitic testacea, from which a perfect protection is thus obtained. Prom the size of the animal and the smallness of the outer chamber, it is clear that the inhabitant of the Belemnite could never entirely withdraw within the shell; and it appears probable that the guarjl, independent of its use in preserving a well-adjusted buoyancy, was also intended to furnish to the muscles an abutment and support on which they could adhere, and from which, like a fulcrum, they could receive additional strength.
The surface of the two lateral muscles which encompassed or clasped the guard, had each a distinct power of secretion, although they formed their laminae at the same time. This accounts for the sutures which separate the guard into two longitudinal portions. These muscles, in some specimens appear not to have increased in proportion to the lamina? they encompassed, and therefore, when the guard greatly enlarged, to have been unable to secrete other laminae completely surrounding the former. Hence arises sometimes a groove on one side, frequently in old specimens displaying the shortening of the laminae as they accumulated and as the edges of the muscles were withdrawn.
In some species the muscles appear to fold together near the apex, and form two or three grooves in this part; while in others they lap over the apex and form a mamillar termination. In very perfect specimens we may observe in some species a longitudinal slit in the guard where it adheres to the chambered cone, evidently also arising from the causes cited before. On the guard of such specimens we may distinctly trace impressions of the branching bloodvessels in each of the two longitudinal muscles; which furnishes, in my opinion, a most satisfactory evidence that the guard was really enveloped by them in the manner in which I have stated. 
Description of the Species. 
In endeavouring to fix specific characters to the various Belemnites that have fallen under my observation, and which I have considered as distinct species, I ought to state that they are chiefly derived from that part which I have called the guard. I must however acknowledge the insufficiency of this part to yield distinctions which may secure us from all error. It is obvious how much a form is liable to be changed where it results from the continual superpositions of fresh laminae, which if not regularly and conformably secreted, produce not unfrequently considerable deformity and deviations.

