
X.—On the Chalk and Sands beneath it (usually termed Green-sand) in the Vicinity of Lyme Regis, Dorset, and Beer, Devon. 
BY H. T. DE LA BECHE, ESQ. P.R., L. and G. S.S., ETC. 
[Read December 16th, 1825.]
IN presenting an account of the manner in which the above rocks occur in the vicinity of Lyme Regis and Beer, I by no means wish to engage in the discussion which has arisen respecting Green-sand; but merely to describe the rocks, as they exist in that neighbourhood. At the same time, I consider it as much to be regretted, that some general term is not given to the sands, marls, and clays which occur beneath the Chalk, as has been done in the case of the Oolite formation: the various parts might then be distinguished by different specific names, and there would be no more impropriety in grouping the Green and Ferruginous sands together, than in uniting under one term the various members of the Oolite formation, and distinguishing them by the names of Great and Inferior oolite, Kimmeridge and Oxford clays*, &c. Some such arrangement as this would prevent much uncertainty: for at present when the term Green-sand is used alone, without further distinction, we may be led to confound two different things. Moreover, we are in want of a general appellation by which to denote these rocks collectively; for we are not to suppose that all the small divisions that may be made in this collection of sands, marls, and clays in the east of England, can be traced into other and distant countries, where, however, the sands, &c., as a mass may be easily recognised. This cannot be done even in comparatively small distances, as will be seen in the district which I am about to notice; since the sands come together, and seem more or less to pass into each other; while the marls and clays, found among them in the east of England, have disappeared.
The cliffs near Lyme Regis and Beer afford ample opportunities for examining the Chalk and the sands beneath it, usually termed Green-sand, and there is no difficulty in determining the order in which they occur. For the portions of the cliffs composed of these rocks, I must refer to my section of this coast contained in the Geological Transactions, vol. i. second series, PI. VIII.; and for a detailed section of their relative position, to PI. XVI. which accompanies this paper. I shall in the first instance, for the sake of convenience, notice the Chalk and the sands beneath it near Lyme Regis, and then proceed to those near Beer.
Chalk near Lyme Regis. (PI. XVI. fig. 1.)
This Chalk may be divided into Chalk with flints, Chalk without flints, and Chalk with quartz-grains; and is, taken as a mass, about 190 or 200 feet thick, where most developed at Pinhay and Dowlands cliffs.
Chalk with flints.—This, as usual, constitutes the upper part of the formation, and is about 150 feet thick at Dowlands. For about 100 feet from the top, the flints are very numerous, and in layers, occasionally mixed with continuous seams of the same substance. In its lower part, the flints become more rare, gradually losing the appearance of being distributed in layers, and finally occur as detached pieces, without order, in the mass of chalk. The organic remains that usually occur in this division of the Chalk, are so well known, that it would be useless to enter into a detail of them; they have not been found very abundantly in this neighbourhood; but such as have been discovered, correspond with those contained in the same division of the Chalk in the east of England.
Chalk without flints.—This division succeeds to the above, the flints becoming gradually scarce, and in the end disappearing altogether:—in the neighbourhood I am noticing, it is in general tolerably hard, and does not exceed 30 or 40 feet in thickness. The most abundant organic remains contained in it are the Catillus Cuvieri of M. Brongniart, Env. de Paris*, PI. IV. fig. 10, (the Inoceramus Cuvieri of Sowerby), and the Mt/tiloides labiatus of M. Brongniart, Env. de Paris, PI. III. fig. 4, (the Inoceramus mytiloides of Sowerby, tab. 442). The palates, scales, and teeth of fish are also found in it, with Belemnites, and the Ostrea vesicularis of Lamarck. (Env. de Paris, PI. III. fig. 5.)
Chalk with quartz-grains.—This division gradually acquires small irregugularly rounded grains of white quartz, and ends by becoming thickly studded with them, and thence acquiring considerable hardness. It is difficult to say whether these grains have been mechanically rounded by attrition against each other, previous to their envelopement in the Chalk, or whether they are of contemporaneous origin with it;—it is however most probable that they are of mechanical origin. The thickness of this division is about 20 or 30 feet, and at the bottom of it there is a very hard compact bed, about 3 feet thick, in which the quartz and siliceous matter greatly predominate, giving to the whole a very siliceous character. This bed is of a browner tint than the Chalk above it, and may thus be easily recognised in Pinhay, Whitelands, Charlton, Rusedon, and Dowlands, the separation between the two being rather marked as to colour. This bed, for the present, I class with the Chalk containing quartz-grains, as it agrees more with that than with the sandstone beneath it;—the surface of the bed next to the Chalk with quartz-grains, contains numerous organic remains, which, with those contained in the whole of this division, are as follows:
Sands and Sandstones beneath the Chalk near Lyme Regis. 
These may, for the convenience of more easy description, be divided into three parts, viz. yellowish-brown Sandstone with chert-seams; yellowish-brown Sand (commonly called "Fox Mould" by the people of the country); and Sands and Sandstones containing an abundance of green-earth, from which circumstance the term Green-sand has been very generally applied to the whole of the above sands and sandstones in this district;—these taken together constitute a thickness of nearly 200 feet.
Yellowish-brown Sandstone with chert-seams.—This division commences immediately beneath the very compact bed, mentioned under the head of Chalk with quartz-grains. The upper portion of this Sandstone, for the thickness of 12 feet, does not contain the chert in regular seams, but merely in detached pieces; here and there we observe portions of green-earth, with thin veins and specks of oxide of iron. This upper portion contains the teeth, vertebrae and scales of fish, the spines of Echinites, and a quantity of broken shells, among which, pieces of Pectens and Oysters are distinguishable. To this succeeds a very compact and yellowish-brown siliceous sandstone with regular chert-seams, which are in general several inches thick, and afford very fine specimens of chalcedony. In this sandstone, organic remains are by no means well preserved; on the contrary, the shells most frequently occur much broken, the fragments being arranged in layers parallel to the chert-seams. The Chama digitata, Sowerby, (Min. Con. T. 174.) is not an uncommon fossil in this division; and the Spatangus ornatus, Defr. (Env. de Paris, PI. V. fig. 6.) is to be found in the chert. The whole of this division is from 70 to 80 feet in thickness, and can be well studied in Ware Cliffs, the western side of Pinhay, at Whitelands, Charlton, and Dowlands.
Yellowish-brown sand (Fox mould).—This division is about 70 or 80 feet thick, and consists principally of a yellowish-brown sand of various shades of colour, acquiring, however, green-earth as it approaches the next-mentioned division, into which it seems to pass. This sand can be best studied at the fine section obtained at the new road between Lyme Regis and Charmouth, where a deep cut has been made in it at the top of Black Ven. Organic remains are extremely rare in it, a few scattered fragments only of shells having been yet discovered; in this respect, it differs very widely from the next division.
Sand and Sandstone containing an abundance of green-earth.—This in fact may be fairly called a Green-sand, being almost wholly of that colour, and is principally composed of a mixture of green-earth and siliceous sand. It abounds in organic remains, contains indurated nodules and seams (commonly called Cow Stones) in its lower part, and is about 40 or 50 feet in thickness. Some portions of this green-sand, when exposed to wet, have rather a clayey character, and the indurated nodules sometimes contain mica, and thin veins of calcareous spar.
The organic remains, which are in general well preserved, and sometimes converted into chalcedony, are as follows:
Having thus described the chalk and the sands beneath it, as they occur between Lyme Regis and Axmouth, I shall now proceed to notice the same rocks as they are exhibited in the vicinity of Beer, Devon. Ample opportunities are afforded for studying the developement of the chalk, &c. at the latter place, in the cliffs on both sides the village. In order, however, to understand the changes which the various portions undergo, it will be necessary to commence with the section afforded by White Cliff, between Beer and Seaton. (PI. XVI. fig. 2.)
Chalk of White Cliff, Beer. 
This rock is developed much in the same way as in the vicinity of Lyme Regis, with the exception that the lowest part of the Chalk without flints does not become studded with quartz-grains, though the compact bed, abounding in organic remains, is still seen beneath it. The latter is from its hardness very conspicuous, and may be seen at low water, forming a ledge of rocks that extend into the sea to the eastward of the village, making a basin-shaped curve, and again rising towards the line of cliffs that extend to Beer Head. Near the village this bed is not so thick as in the vicinity of Lyme Regis.
Sands and Sandstones beneath the Chalk at White Cliff. 
A glance at the sections (PI. XVI. fig.2and 3.) will show, that though the general mode of occurrence of these rocks is the same as that in the vicinity of Lyme Regis, yet there are parts which at other places are more or less developed. Commencing immediately beneath the compact and siliceous bed above noticed, we have the upper portion of the sandstone with chert-seams much thicker than at Pinhay, Whitelands, &c. At the latter place it was of no great importance; but here it has swollen out, and forms a much more conspicuous part of the section, containing at the same time more green-earth. The following is a section (PI. XVI. fig. 2, 3.) of this rock and of the yellowish-brown sandstone with chert-seams, into which it passes.
To these succeed sands of a greenish-yellow or brown colour, which are equivalent to the yellowish-brown sands (commonly called Fox mould) of the vicinity of Lyme Regis: they here, however, contain much more green-earth, and inclose (which they do not at Lyme Regis) several nodules of chert. The various shades of colour are also more conspicuous in the upper parts than at the latter place.
To this, as at Lyme Regis, succeed sands abounding in green-earth, and containing the same fossils and the same indurated portions as at that place; there seems, however, to be more iron-pyrites in those of Beer. The whole of the above sands and sandstones pass into each other.
The above section shows the manner in which the Chalk and the Sands beneath it occur on the eastern side of the Beer basin; the following will exhibit the changes these rocks have undergone on the western side.
Chalk, with the Sands and Sandstones beneath it, at Branscombe and the Beer Quarries. 
The principal information to be derived from these, is the position of the Beer stone, which, whether it belongs to the chalk or to the arenaceous rocks beneath, it is difficult to say.
At Branscombe Cliffs, to the westward of Beer Head, we have the best exposure of the rocks above and beneath the Beer stone. The latter has been quarried by sinking a shaft from the top of the hill, and then driving a level to the face of the cliff, which thus presents a large cave-like aperture.
The Chalk-without-flints, and the Chalk-with-flints, which together attain the thickness of 200 feet near Beer Head, can be seen to rest upon the Beer stone, which in its turn rests upon a light-coloured compact sandstone, containing a considerable portion of green-earth; but exhibiting in its upper portions ferruginous parts;—beneath this we have the yellowish-brown sandstone with chert-seams.
At the quarries, situated about half a mile or more from the village of Beer, the Beer stone itself can be best studied. This stone appears to have been worked for ages, as old buildings and the state of the quarries testify. When first quarried, it is somewhat soft and easily worked, but becomes harder by exposure to the air; it is nearly white, and principally composed of carbonate of lime, with small brilliant facets, which also appear to consist of carbonate of lime partially disseminated through it: it contains also some argillaceous and siliceous matter, and very thinly sprinkled specks of green-earth*.
The quarry itself is interesting as a cavern, and affords a miniature representation of the Maestricht quarries; the roof, which is nearly even and parallel to the floor, being supported by large square pillars. The depth of this cavernous quarry from the entrance is about 170 yards. The workmen enumerate the following beds, beneath 18 feet of indurated chalk without flints, which they call Skull. 
1. Upper bed,—eighteen inches thick, rather hard.
2. Eighteen inches thick, soft.
3. Two feet thick, rather soft.
4. Two feet thick, rather soft.
5. Sixteen inches thick, hard.
6. Sixteen inches thick, mixture of hard and soft.
7. Eight inches thick, very hard.
8. Two feet thick, very hard.
Beneath these are about 5 or 6 feet of a hard white calcareous rock, which burns into good lime, but is not quarried as the others are. Beneath this the sandstones commence.
From what has been above stated, it appears that considerable changes take place in rock-formations even in short distances: as for instance, the remarkable bed with quartz-grains, though so conspicuous at Pinhay, Whitelands, and Dowlands, fines off at White Cliff, near Beer, and is no longer visible at Branscombe: on the other hand, the Beer stone of Branscombe and the quarries is not found even at so short a distance as White Cliff; and therefore we ought not to be surprised at not finding it at Dowlands, Whitelands, &c. The chalk at the latter places contains quartz-grains in its lowest part; whereas at Beer the same part of the chalk contains none, if we except the remarkable bed above mentioned. The Fox mould near Lyme Regis, does not contain so much green-earth as at Beer, and few, if any, nodules of chert. The sandstone also, between the chalk and the sandstone with chert-seams, is much more developed at Beer than at Lyme Regis, and contains much more greenearth. If, therefore, in rocks formed at the same geological epoch, variations such as are here noticed, occur within the space of a few miles, how many points of difference may we not expect to find in geological equivalents, belonging to countries many thousand miles apart!
