
XI.—On the Formation of the Valley of Kingsclere and other Valleys by the Elevation of the Strata that enclose them; and on the Evidences of the original Continuity of the Basins of London and Hampshire. 
BY THE REV. W. BUCKLAND, S.T.P. F.R.S. F.L.S.
PRESIDENT OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, AND PROFESSOR OF MINERALOGY AND GEOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, ETC.
[Read February 8th, 1825.]
IT may be seen, on referring to Mr. Greenough's Geological Map of England, and to the map annexed to the paper of Mr. Webster on the Basins of London and Hampshire, that the tertiary formations which occupy the basin of London, become gradually contracted in their progress westward through Berkshire, until they terminate in a point at Savernake Forest, between Hungerford and Marlborough. The strata of chalk, on which these formations repose, dip inwardly from the circumference towards the axis of the basin, and sink, nearly on all sides, beneath overlying beds of the Plastic and London clays.
A remarkable exception, however, to this arrangement occurs near the south-western extremity of the basin, a few miles to the south of Newbury, at Kingsclere and Highclere. It is the chief object of the present communication to describe the appearances attending this exception, and to point out some general conclusions with respect to the origin of certain valleys from the elevation of the strata that now inclose them. The observations on which this paper is founded, were made principally during a visit in the summer of 1819 to the Earl of Carnarvon at Highclere. I had then an opportunity of carefully surveying the ground in question, which I had viewed hastily some months before on a journey through the district in company with Mr. Greenough and Mr. Warburton. But for the more minute details of the limits of the several formations, as they wind along the south-western border of the basin, I am indebted to the exertions of an eminent botanist, Mr. J. R. Gowen of Highclere.
The red lines on the map, extending from the village of Inkpen to Highclere, mark the southern and south-western outcrops of the formation of Plastic clay, as displayed on the surface at several interrupted points, and as used in many places for brick-earth. It presents the same irregular alternations of brick-red, mottled, and occasionally blackish clay with loam, sand and rounded chalk-flint gravel, which occur in this formation at Reading, Blackheath, and wheresoever else it presents itself within the basins of London and Hampshire. Occasionally also, as at Kintbury on the west of Newbury, it contains the same organic remains, in the same state of preservation, as in the wellknown clay-pits at Reading; viz. oysters, sharks' teeth, &c In the blacker beds of clay there is abundance of vegetable matter and wood, constituting the same kind of imperfect brown-coal that attends this formation at Blackheath, Alum Bay, and Corfe Castle. The lowest stratum of the formation, or that next above the chalk, consists, in this instance also, for the most part of sand; and at its actual contact with the chalk, is often loaded with flints, which are coated superficially with either a green or brown rusty crust. The sand is fine and siliceous, and is interspersed, as usual, with particles of green-earth.
Into this western and uppermost extremity of the great chalk-basin of London, the London clay penetrates to a considerable extent, the limits of which clay it is foreign to my present purpose to investigate; whilst the greater number of the minor hills round Newbury are composed of loamy sands and clays of the Plastic formation, occasionally denuded, in the valleys, down to the subjacent chalk. Several extensive plains that still remain in heath and commons, are composed of extremely sterile sand-beds, more or less mixed up with gravel*.
The irregularity of structure, which I have to describe on the west of Kingsclere, consists in a sudden and unusual elevation of the chalk, accompanied by fracture and an inverted dip, which will be best understood by referring to the annexed section and map. (PI. XVII.) At Inkpen Hill the chalk rises to the height of 1011 feet, the greatest elevation which it attains in England: it here also forms the highest point of a double series of strata, which from thence to Highclere Park are seen to dip, on either side of a central axis, in two opposite directions, nearly north and south; the axis itself or anticlinal line.running nearly from west-north-west to east-south-east, parallel to the edge of the basin of Newbury and to the high ridge of chalk. This opposite dip, from Inkpen to Highclere, is seen in the chalk-pits that are met with along the intermediate valleys; but from Highclere Park to Kingsclere, it is more distinctly marked by the bursting up of beds of the upper greensand or firestone from beneath and between two opposite escarpments of chalk. The northernmost of these escarpments dips rapidly to the north, beneath the plastic clay formation of the basin of Newbury; the southernmost dips less rapidly to the south, i. e. towards the basin of Hampshire. The general elevation of this southern escarpment is nearly twice as great as that of the northern, and its dip is less in nearly the same proportion. To it belong the summits of Beacon Hill and Ladel Hill, which form landmarks to all the surrounding country, and are sometimes called the Burghclere Hills. At the eastern extremity of this tract of green-sand, the two chalk-escarpments close round and become confluent, with a dip and bearing conformable to those of the subjacent sandstone. The valley comprehended within these escarpments is from 4 to 5 miles long, and from 1 to 2 miles broad. I shall call it the Valley of Kingsclere, from the small town situated at its eastern extremity.
On the slope of the southern escarpment, between Beacon Hill and Ladel Hill, a considerable thickness of hard and gray chalk or chalk-marl is seen to divide the softer chalk of the summit from the green-sand or firestone which forms the base; but on the northern escarpment the total superficial breadth of the chalk, owing to its more rapid dip, is comparatively small.
The green-sand (or firestone) of the vale of Kingsclere, in substance and organic remains, resembles that of Merstham and the vale of Pewsey, and the upper green-sand of the Isle of Wight. It contains irregular and subordinate beds of chert; its greatest elevation is nearly the same as that of the northern chalk-escarpment, neither the one nor the other being high enough to interrupt the view of the southern escarpment, which is seen from all parts of the vale of Newbury; as will be better understood by referring to the section, than from verbal description.
This unusual position of a valley, composed of green-sand, within the apparent area of a chalk-basin, derives illustration from some other similar instances which I shall mention, of valleys produced by the disturbance and removal of the superior strata, and which occur as we follow the edges of the chalk, south-westward from Kingsclere, through Wilts and Dorset towards Weymouth. These all present the same features of a valley, circumscribed on all sides by an escarpment, whose component strata dip outwards in all directions from an anticlinal line, running along the central axis of the valley. The first of them occurs near the villages of Ham and Shalbourne, about 5 miles to the west of the valley of Kingsclere, and differs from it only in the circumstance of the escarpment, which is continuous on every side but the south, being less elevated, and the area within being less extensive. The western end of this valley is separated from the upper extremity of the vale of Pewsey by only a narrow and low bar of chalk, stretching like a bridge across the green-sand. Without this bar, the valley of Shalbourne would have been confluent with the upper end of the vale of Pewsey.
Another valley of the same kind occurs at Bower Chalk, about 10 miles to the east of Shaftsbury. In this case also the strata consist of chalk resting upon green-sand: the inclosing bar or isthmus of chalk is known by the name of Cleve Hill, and without it the valley of Bower Chalk would have been confluent with that of Alvedeston, which expands into the plain of Shaftsbury.
A third and still more striking example may be seen at Poxwell near Osmington, about 7 miles on the north-east of Weymouth, being nearly elliptical in shape, and in size not much exceeding two or three times that of the Coliseum at Rome. In the circumstances of the strata dipping in every direction from a central axis, and of the valley being inclosed by a circumscribing escarpment, it perfectly coincides with the four valleys in chalk and green-sand above enumerated, and differs only in the fact of the strata inclosing it consisting of Portland stone and Purbeck marble.
The drainage of these valleys is generally effected by an aperture in one of their lateral escarpments, and not at either extremity of their longer axis, as would have happened had they been simply excavated by the sweeping force of rapid water; and as it is utterly impossible to explain the origin of any valleys of this description by denudation or alone, indeed without referring the present position of their component strata to a force acting' from below, and elevating the strata along their central line of fracture, I shall venture so far to involve this theory of their origin with the facts which they display, as to designate them by the appellation of Valleys of ELEVATION: of course due allowance must be made for their subsequent modification by diluvial denudation. For further examples of inclosed valleys, affording similar axes or centres of elevation, 1 refer to the map and section of the Bristol coal-basin, accompanying the memoir by Mr. Conybeare and myself on the S.W. coal district of England, in the last volume of the Geological Transactions, [Vol. i. Part II. 2d series;] where, in following the anticlinal lines that traverse that district, it will be seen that the strata on either side of them are in some places elevated into lofty ridges, and in others pass along the lowest points of the valleys. An example of the latter kind may be seen in the Vale of Westbury near Bristol; and also near Thornbury, Berkeley, and Newnham on Severn. In the section of the South-Welch mineral basin, (PI. XXXIV. of the same volume,) a similar example occurs in the Vale of the Ely to the west of Llandaff; and in following the great anticlinal line which extends across the Severn from the west extremity of the Mendip Hills through Glamorganshire and Pembrokeshire to Milford Haven, there are several examples of valleys similarly constructed, and composed of a basis of old red-sandstone, inclosed by hills of limestone, which face each other with an opposite escarpment, and have an opposite dip.
It will be seen, if we follow on Mr. Greenough's map the south-western escarpment of the chalk in the counties of Wilts and Dorset, that, at no great distance from these small elliptical valleys of elevation, there occur several longer and larger valleys, forming deep notches, as it were, in the lofty edge of the chalk. These are of similar structure to the smaller valleys we have been considering, and consist of green-sand, inclosed by chalk at one extremity, and flanked by two escarpments of the same, facing each other with an opposite dip; but they differ in the circumstance of their other and broader extremity being without any such inclosure, and gradually widening till it is lost in the expanse of the adjacent country.
The cases I now allude to, are the Vale of Pewsey to the east of Devizes, that of the Wily to the east of Warminster, and the valley of the Nadder extending from Shaftsbury to Barford near Salisbury; in which last, not only the strata of green-sand are brought to the surface, but also the still lower formations of Purbeck and Portland beds and of Kimmeridge clay.
It might at first sight appear that these valleys are nothing more than simple valleys of denudation; but the fact of the strata composing their escarpments having an opposite and outward dip from the axis of the valley, and this, often at a high angle, as near Fonthilland Barford in the vale of the Nadder, and at Oare near the base of Martinsell Hill in the Vale of Pewsey, obliges us to refer their inclination to some antecedent violence, analogous to that to which I have attributed the position of the strata in the inclosed valleys nearKingsclere, Ham, and Burbage. Nor is it probable that without some pre-existing fracture or opening in the lofty line of the great chalk-escarpment, which is here presented to the north-west, the power of water alone would have forced open three such deep valleys as those in question, without causing them to maintain a more equable breadth, instead of narrowing till they end in a point in the body of the chalk.
A still larger and more decided example of the same kind of valley of elevation occurs in the well-known case of the great valley of the Weald of Kent and Sussex; surrounded as it is on all sides but the east by lofty escarpments of chalk, facing towards each other with an outward dip in every direction, and traversed from east to west by a central anticlinal line; on either side of which line the strata of iron-sand, weald-clay, lower green-sand, gault-clay, and firestone sink like the two sides of a roof, with a high and regular inclination beneath the inclosing escarpments of the chalk of the North- and Southdowns. The structure of this valley has been well represented in the sections of Kent and Sussex published by Mr. W. Smith, and also in the section that accompanies the inestimable work of Messrs. Conybeare and Phillips on the Geology of England. This district has been usually described by the name of the Kentish Denudation, seemingly from the hypothesis that the exposure of all the strata here laid open, beneath the chalk, was the effect simply of denudation. Now I am disposed fully to allow, that the force of water has been sufficient to sweep away the greatest portion of the loose and shattered fragments, which, after the elevation I am assuming, must have covered the axis of this as well as the other valleys we have been considering, and which must still have remained there in the form of rubbish, had there been no subsequent diluvial action to drift them away: but I think the slightest inspection of the sections I have referred to, will at once convince us, that no power of denudation by water could have produced the doubly inclined position of the entire body of the strata within this district, as well as of the chalk by which it is surrounded; and that we must here again have recourse to a force producing elevation from beneath, along the axis of the valley, if we would find an adequate cause for the effects that have been produced in it along an extent of 60 miles in length and 20 miles in breadth.
The facts then which we have examined, conspire to lead us to the conclusion, that rot only many inclosed valleys similar to that of Kingsclere, but also, in a less degree, many open valleys similar to that of Pewsey and the great central valley of Kent and Sussex, though largely modified by denudation, owe their origin to an antecedent elevation and fracture of their component strata; and these phaenomena may be regarded as of frequent occurrence in the formations of all ages, and as indicating the multitude of disturbing causes by which the earth's surface has been affected.
Another question of some moment derives much light from the evidence afforded by the valley of Kingsclere and the contiguous district along the line of junction of the plastic clay with the subjacent chalk, viz. whether the chalk was disposed in its present form of troughs or basins before the deposition of the tertiary formations now inclosed in them? or (to speak more locally) whether the basinsof London and Hants existed in their present relative position to each other and to the chalk, before the epoch of such deposition? and I think the evidence we here find, shows as decisively for the basin of London, as that which we collect at the two extremities of the Isle of Wight and near Corfe Castle does for the basin of Hants and Dorset, that the present inward inclination of the southern edges of both these basins has taken place since the deposition of the Plastic, and also, probably, of the London, clay.
The sections near London afford us no means of judging of this question, as all the tertiary strata are here nearly horizontal and parallel to those of the horizontal chalk. But where it happens (as it does near Highclere) that thin and regular beds of sand, gravel and clay, are disposed at a high angle, and exactly parallel to the strata of the subjacent chalk, along a considerable tract of country, it is no less certain that the movement of both these formations, whether by elevation or depression, was contemporaneous, than it is clear from the section at Alum Bay, that in the Isle of Wight the vertical and parallel position of the same formations on the south frontier of the Hampshire basin was posterior, not only to the deposition of the plastic, but also of the London, clay.
Assuming then, that the London and Hampshire basins did not hold their present relations to each other and to the intermediate elevated plains, at the time of the deposition of the plastic clay, the next inquiry is, whether on these plains there be any evidence to show that the tertiary strata which now repose almost exclusively within these basins, have been originally more continuous than they are at present, or perhaps united together.
Now it happens that the space dividing the basin of London from that of Hampshire is almost wholly occupied by an elevated plain of chalk, the average level of which exceeds that of the tertiary hills within the area of these basins, whilst its surface is diversified by undulations of valleys and hills, the latter varying from 600 to 1000 feet above the level of the sea.
Had the tertiary strata of our two basins been ever united together in one, it were to be expected that some traces of such union would remain in the space that now divides them; and such traces we actually find on those portions of this district that constitute even the highest summits of the chalk-formation that exist in England, viz. on the top of Combe Hill, a little east of Inkpen Hill near Highclere; on Chidbury Hill and Beacon Hill, that form two of the highest summits of Salisbury Plain between Amesbury and Everleigh; on the top of Clay-pit Hill on Chiltern Down, near Heytesbury; and at still more distant points, on the lofty summits of Blackdown Hill between Dorchester and Abbotsbury in Dorset, and of Nettlebed and Stokenchurch in Oxfordshire.
At all these elevated points, the identity of character which the strata on these detached hills and ridges uniformly possess with that of the plastic clay formation in the basins of London and the New Forest, affords abundant ground for concluding that these two basins were originally united together in one continuous deposit across the now intervening chalk of Salisbury Plain in Wilts, and the plains of Andover and Basingstoke in Hants, and that the greater integrity in which the tertiary strata are preserved within the basins, has resulted from the protection which their comparatively low position has afforded them from the ravages of diluvial denudation. .. .
The tender and destructible nature of the sand, clay and gravel composing this formation, would render them peculiarly liable to be swept away by the transit of violent currents of water; and the wreck of the harder portions of sandy strata thus destroyed, is sufficiently evident in the enormous blocks of sandstone which not only occur in Wilts, in numbers so great as to lie like a flock of sheep in the valleys near Hungerford, and thence derive the local name of gray wethers, but are in more or less abundance co-extensive with the entire surface of the chalk, from the Wolds of Yorkshire to the Hills of Sidmouth and Blackdown in Devonshire.
Their abundance at Clatford Bottom near Marlborough, between the Druidical temples of Abury and Stonehenge, whose materials they have supplied, is mentioned in my "Reliquiae Diluvianae." Windsor Castle is built of a similar stone, found in insulated blocks on Bag-shot Heath. Another example of their occurrence in vast numbers on the naked surface of the chalk, at Ashdown Park on the south of Swindon, has been described by Dr. Kidd. A similar case occurs on the slope and summit of the chalk hill which overhangs the village of Portisham near Abbotsbury in Dorset: blocks of the same kind abound also near Sidmouth. In all these cases many of the blocks still remain at the highest levels on the summits of the hills, whilst others have been drifted to the adjacent valleys, and sometimes, as at Portisham and Sidmouth, beyond the present area of the chalk.
The general dispersion of these enormous blocks, which probably once existed as concretions in extensive beds of sand, since swept away in consequence of their buoyancy, affords strong evidence, in addition to that supplied by the residuary patches and outliers of plastic clay, that these tertiary formations were once deposited over nearly the whole surface of the chalk in the south of England; and that their separation into the two distinct basins of London and Hampshire has resulted, partly from local elevations and depressions by subterraneous violence, since the deposition of the plastic clay; and partly from the still more recent removal of much of their substance by diluvial denudation.
I cannot leave this subject without referring to the remarkable fact of the occurrence of insulated portions of tertiary strata, as well as of chalk and greensand, on the summits of the Savoy Alps, at elevations of more than 10,000 feet above the level of the sea; which seem to bear the same relation to the tertiary strata of the valleys of Italy, France, and Germany, that our trifling Heights of Inkpen in Hants, Blackdown in Dorset, and the North Downs in Surrey, bear to the lower regions of the Basins of London and Hants. As these Alpine deposits are contemporaneous fragments of the more extensive strata of the adjacent low countries, we are forced, in explaining their present position, to adopt one or other of two conclusions; either, that at the time of the deposition of these strata the sea covered, not only the highest portions of the chalk of England, but also the summits of the Savoy Alps; or, that since the deposition of these beds, by elevation of the mountains or depression of the valleys, or by the united effect of both these causes, the relative level of the one to the other has been changed to an amount of many thousand feet. Now as the undisturbed and nearly horizontal position in which the tender and frangible materials of the tertiary strata still remain in the basins of Paris and Lombardy forbids us to suppose that any depression could have brought them down so quietly to their present level, the theory of the elevation of those few portions which occupy the Alpine summits, remains by far the most probable that is submitted to our choice. 
The idea first suggested from the examination of the basins of Paris and Lombardy, that the tertiary strata were limited in their extent to certain hollow spaces within the area of the chalk, has been proved incorrect by the discovery of similar strata very extensively over Europe; and an excellent account of these further discoveries has been recently given by M. Brongniart in the 2d edition of his History of the Environs of Paris.
They have also been found to occur in the most distant regions of Asia, Africa, and America; so that these deposits, which were at first considered simply local, are proved to be among the most extensive, as well as the most recent, that have taken place on the globe: and as their general position is certainly, for the most part, in the lowest spaces of the earth's surface, and their existence in mountain-summits but an occasional and rare anomaly, the most simple solution of their appearance in such lofty situations will be found in the hypothesis, that these mountains have been elevated since the period at which the position of the tertiary strata took place.
I shall now add a few remarks on the diluvian and post-diluvian deposits that occur within this district.
The diluvian deposits do not differ materially from the ordinary gravel of the London basin. The thickness and extent of these beds of gravel are very irregular. They consist chiefly of chalk-flints, more or less rolled; a few rounded pebbles of the Lickie sandstone, and occasional fragments and blocks of the tertiary gray-wether sandstone, being intermixed. Near Newbury they have been occasionally found to contain the remains of the elephant, rhinoceros, ox, stag, horse, &c.
The post-diluvian formations are limited to the flat meadow district which forms the valley on each side of the Kennet, from Hungerford nearly to Reading; and consist, 1st of peat, and 2dly of marl (here called malm), analogous to the shell-marl which accompanies the peat of many shallow lakes in Scotland and England. The average width of the peat is less than a mile, and its thickness varies from 5 to nearly 15 feet. Large quantities of it are dug for fuel, and are also burnt into peat-ashes, which serve as a top-dressing for land. It is much intermixed with minute crystals of selenite and a small quantity of carbonate of lime, and abounds with branches and other remains of trees, viz. fir cones, nuts and seeds; and also with the bones and horns of oxen, red deer, roebucks, horses, wild boars, and beavers. A human skull of high antiquity has also been found in it at a depth of many feet, at the contact of the peat with a substratum of shell-marl. It was accompanied by rude instruments of stone, which lead us to conclude that it was the skull of one of the aboriginal inhabitants of the island, who had not the art of working metals. Along the northern edge of this peat bog there is a considerable deposit of marl mixed with calcareous tufa, known to the natives on the west of Newbury by the name of the strand; a name evidently derived from the circumstance of its forming a kind of wide calcareous causeway along the edge of the moor, rising like an artificial terrace a few inches above the present level of the adjacent meadows. It is often 60 feet and more in width, and varies from 2 to 10 feet in thickness, and is frequently interstratified with beds of peat varying from 6 inches to 3 or 4 feet in thickness: its substance is, in some parts, a soft laminated cream-coloured marl; in others it is tufaceous and granular, and the grains (which are usually rugged and of the size of a small pea) are often conglomerated into spherical and lenticular balls, varying in diameter from 1 inch to 2 feet. Many of these balls are formed of concentric layers concreted around some extraneous body as a nucleus: occasionally, we find them elongated to a cylindrical form, and containing a central cavity, in which there is either a branch of wood or traces of the decayed remains of a branch.
Other concretions are formed round the bones or horns of animals that appear to have been stranded on this terrace, whilst it was accumulating; and throughout the substance of the marl, as well as of the tufaceous beds, are dispersed the same varieties of horns and bones that occur in the peat, and multitudes of shells of the same freshwater Molluscae which now inhabit the adjacent river. These freshwater shells are in various stages of decay; and from this circumstance, I am disposed to refer the origin of the calcareous matter of the strand to the detritus of dead shells that have in former times been accumulated along the boundary-line of the highest floods of the river,— an opinion which derives support from the fact of this strand being almost exclusively limited to the north frontier of the valley; i. e. to that side of it, which in the seasons of flood would be the repository of all drifted materials, wafted by the prevailing winds of this country (namely the S. and S.W.) to the lee-shore.
The skimmings of these flood-waters would be composed nearly of dead shells; and if we suppose all but the most recent of them to have undergone decomposition during the period of their lying in the strand, and their calcareous materials to have been converted into the marl and tufaceous concretions of which this strand is composed, we adopt an hypothesis fully adequate to explain the phaenomena. The slight traces of shell-marl which occur in a bank parallel to the strand and nearly in the middle of Benham Marsh, and in a few islands that rise occasionally in the main body of the peat, are to be explained on the same theory; and all these facts, as well as their explanation, are, I believe, in perfect harmony with those of the peat-bogs in the meadows adjacent to the river Test near Romsey, which have been laid before the Society by our Secretary, Mr. Lyell.
It is quite impossible to refer the origin of the tufaceous portion of these marl-beds to the action of springs or of flood-waters, charged with carbonate of lime; since there are no springs that pour their waters along the line of the deposits in question; and, if we would refer them to a precipitation of calcareous matter from the flood-waters of the Kennet, we should expect similar deposits along all the frontier-lines of these floods, and they would not be limited to the lee side of the valley, and to insular projections in the body of the marsh.
The total amount of similar driftings along the south border of these bogs is so trifling as to be rarely visible, and is no where known to exceed a foot in thickness.
The best opportunity of examining the structure of the marl-beds that compose this strand, is afforded in the extensive sections, now open at Benham Marsh, about 3 miles west of Newbury. The marl is also visible in a less perfect degree in the turbaries close to the London road at Woolhampton, about 7 miles on the east of Newbury.
