XIII.—Remarks on the Geology of Jamaica. 
BY H. T. DE LA BECHE, ESQ. F.R.S., F.L.S., 
FEL. GEOL. SOC, HON. MEM. PHYS. AND NAT. SOC. OF GENEVA, ETC. 
[Read Dec. 2nd 1825, and Jan. 6th 1826.] 
THE detailed observations, which alone can establish on a secure basis the solution of those great geological problems, on which the hope of ultimately arriving at any satisfactory theory must of necessity depend, are, notwithstanding the rapid progress which geology has recently made, as yet confined to districts comparatively limited. The investigation of the order in which the mineral masses constituting the earth's surface rest upon each other, and the inquiry how far that order is invariable,—whether the remains of successive races of organized beings, which characterize the different members of the geological series, exhibit in distant countries general features of analogy, or of distinction,—and how far the action of the various geological causes, which appear to have operated in those localities with which we are best acquainted can be recognised in others,—are questions which have hitherto been principally confined to a few European countries. Even the very valuable materials which the comprehensive mind of Humboldt has accumulated, must be considered rather as indicating the extent of the field before us, than as having fully occupied any part of it.
In the present state of our knowledge, detailed monographs of particular districts, although from their very nature in themselves dry and tedious, and little calculated to attract the general reader, must necessarily precede those extensive views, which are more delightful in proportion to the higher intellectual powers which they require for their developement. In the hope of contributing in the more humble manner towards the advancement of a science to which I have been long attached, 1 offer the following observations; feeling at the same time that they require a few preliminary words of explanation and apology.
The minuteness of many of the details, into which I have found it expedient to enter, may appear perhaps to many unnecessarily tedious: but it must be remembered, that in describing a remote, and, if I may so speak, a new geological country, in which the identification and general relations of its constituent rocks are either imperfectly or not at all illustrated by previous knowledge, there is scarcely an alternative between this and a description too vague to be useful. For example: if the geologist were describing the course of the Chalk or Oolitic series in any portion of the European basin, he would be guided at once by his previous knowledge of these formations, as to what circumstances were really material in their physical history, and what were merely subordinate and unimportant; and assuming the same general information on the part of his readers, he might dismiss the subject with all the spirit of a rapid sketch. But in treating of a formation hitherto unexamined, the White Limestone of Jamaica, for instance, the case is entirely altered: all local circumstances, then become of temporary importance, because it is only from the more extended comparison of these that their true relative value can be ascertained. With regard to faults of omission, a tropical climate may perhaps be urged in extenuation; for, not to speak of that incapacity for exertion, whether of body or mind, which it is so calculated to produce, the physical obstacles which it opposes to the researches of the geologist are neither few nor trifling. The tropical forests present not the least of these; for splendid and luxuriant as they are, they are from their very luxuriance almost impenetrable without the aid of persons to cut a path in them, the parasitical plants festooning from tree to tree, and interlacing one with the other.
As yet, no geological description has appeared of Jamaica, nor indeed of either of the large islands of Cuba, or Hayti; so that we have few or no facts previously ascertained, to guide us while investigating the rock formations in Jamaica: neither can we trace the various changes that the rocks have undergone within moderate distances, by comparing the structure of one island with the other. The geological accounts therefore which Humboldt has given us of Mexico and South America become highly valuable, as they afford us information respecting countries not very remote from Jamaica. The only private collection, I believe, of Jamaica rocks or fossils existing in England, previously to my return from the investigation which is the subject of this memoir, was in the possession of Richard Bright, Esq. of Ham Green near Bristol. This collection was made in Jamaica by his son Mr. Robert Bright a few years ago; and the inspection of it, before my embarkation, was of great use to me in directing my attention to those points in the island whence they had been procured.
The examination of rock formations in countries far distant from each other cannot fail of exciting the highest interest in the geologist; for he then has an opportunity of observing whether or not the same causes have been in action in various parts of the earth's surface; and whether the superposition remarked in on© portion of the globe, is the same with that seen in another. He moreover w$ see whether or not rocks exist, which are not included in our European lists: for as we sometimes find several formations wanting between two rocks in England and elsewhere, so m»y we find rock formations in America which are wanting in Europe; there being no more reason why in a series of rocks, represented by a, /3, y, o-, h should not be missing in Europe, than that /3 should be found in England and be wanting in Germany.
The following observations will be confined to that part of Jamaica which is situated to the eastward of a line drawn from Alligator Pond Bay to St. Ann's Bay, thus taking in nearly the eastern half of the island where the most elevated mountains are found. The whole of this portion of Jamaica is hilly and mountainous, with the exception of the extensive plains of Liguanea, St. Catherine's, St. Dorothy, Vere, and the lower part of Clarendon.
The highest, range in the island is that of the Blue Mountains, situated in the eastern part of Jamaica, in the parishes of Port Royal, St. David, St. Thomas-in-the-East, Portland, and St. George. Their principal direction is nearly east and west; but they do not, as is often represented, extend through the whole length of the island: for with the other mountains to the westward of the Agua Alta, or Wag Water, they have no connexion. The Cold or Main Ridge varies from about 5,000 to 6,500 feet in height, and the summit is in some places so narrow as not to be more than three or four yards across. From the northern side of part of this ridge, a curved ridge detaches itself, of gTeater elevation than the other; and from this curved ridge rise three principal masses, which have obtained the name of peaks, that to the east being the most conical. Robertson, in his map of Jamaica, estimates their different heights, at 8184, 7656, and 7576 feet above the level of the sea, that which he calls the northern peak being the most elevated. These heights I am inclined to think too great; for my barometrical measurements, though incomplete, would seem to give about 7600 feet for the highest peak *.
Catherine's Peak, which I found by barometrical measurement to be 4971 feet in height, forms the highest point of the mountains crossing the island from N.W. to S.E. through the parishes of Port Royal, St. Andrew, and St. George, and constituting the next highest range to the Blue Mountains. The Port Royal mountains are of considerable elevation even near the sea, Flamstead House upon the summit of one of them being 3800 feet above its level.

To the westward of this range the mountains are of less elevation. Robertson gives the height of Lunan's Mountain to the north of Spanish Town, as 2282 feet. From Stony Hill Barracks, which I make by barometrical measurement to be 1360 feet in height, a number of mountains of nearly equal elevation extend into St. Mary's: Green Castle upon the summit of one of them being 1322 feet above the sea.
The trap mountains of St. John's attain considerable elevation, and are remarkable for sharp ridges intersecting each other in various directions; the valleys between them becoming suddenly deep, close to their commencement. Robertson gives 3140 feet as the height of the Bull Head, an elevated portion of the mountain in the north of Clarendon, which may in some measure be considered as a western prolongation of those in St. John's. The range of the Mocho Mountains, also in Clarendon, is separated from the above by the basin drained by the mountain portion of the Rio Minho, and its tributary streams.
The Mocho Mountains are nearly of the same height as that elevated district, which being divided at the top into many small hills and valleys, has obtained the name of the Manchester Mountains. The Mocho are separated from the latter mountains by a picturesque valley several miles in length called Mile Gully, which gradually falls into the great plain of Vere and Lower Clarendon.
The greater part of the parish of St. Ann is elevated land, divided into hills and valleys in the manner of Manchester, but on a larger scale: this land attains considerable elevation at Monte Diablo, where it towers above the basin of St. Thomas-in-the-Vale. A continuation of the Monte Diablo range extends to the N.E. and separates the two parishes.
The above is the general character of the principal elevated portions of that part of Jamaica, which it is my present intention to describe. The principal plain is that of Liguanea, with its prolongation through the parishes of St. Catherine and St. Dorothy. The mountains terminate suddenly upon the Liguanea plain, which is inclined, falling gradually from a height of more than 700 feet near the Hope Tavern to the sea near Kingston. The plain of St. Catherine, bounded on the south by the Healthshire Hills, with its continuation into St. Dorothy, does not appear to be so much inclined.
The great plain of Vere and Lower Clarendon is separated from the above by a low range of hills connected with the higher mountains of Clarendon. This district is bounded on the north by the Mocho Mountains, and on the west by those of Manchester. A remarkable hill, called the Round Hill in Vere, terminates this plain near the mouth of the Milk River, and another named Kemp's Hill rises in the middle of Vere. Portland Ridge bounds these lowlands on the S.E. This plain would not appear to be much inclined, as the works at Halse Hall estate, situated some distance inland, are only about 170 feet above the level of the sea.
Luidas Vale, a remarkable basin in the upper part of the parish of St. John, would form the bottom of a lake, were not the waters which run into and fall upon it carried off by numerous sink-holes or gulfs :—but of this more hereafter.
The elevated basin of Whitney estate, situated in the Mocho Range, is a repetition of Luidas Vale on a small scale; the waters losing themselves in sink-holes, and the river, which sinks near the works of the estate, being generally considered as reappearing on the other side of the mountain, as the head of the Milk River.
The basin of St. Thomas-in-the-Vale, now studded with sugar estates, would also form the bottom of a lake, if the rocky pass through which the Rio Cobre flows were stopped up. This defile is a break in the range of the Red Hills, and cannot fail to remind the geologist of many similar breaks in mountain chains in other parts of the world, which, if closed, would convert the districts, the waters of which they are the means of carrying off, into lakes.
A plain of some extent, covered with sugar estates, occurs between Bath (St. Thomas-in-the-East) and the mouth of the Plantain Garden River.
Few countries excel Jamaica in picturesque beauty. The great variety of its surface, added to the luxuriance of tropical vegetation, cannot fail to charm those who have visited it for the first time. Many of the valleys which take their rise in the Blue Mountain Range, more particularly those on the northern side, present a fine union of rock, wood, and water. The rivers running in these valleys are in general short and rapid, and, when swollen by heavy tropical rains, dangerous to pass. The views from the summits of many of the mountains are most splendid, particularly at sunset; and that from the top of Catherine's Peak, extending to the north and south sides of the island, is well known and easily attainable. The Blue Mountain Peaks, as might be expected, present noble and commanding views over the eastern part of the island: to obtain these, however, the traveller is in general compelled to ascend some tree, as the peaks are covered with vegetation, which in a great measure conceals the country from him.
Having thus presented the reader with a slight sketch of the scenery of Jamaica, I shall proceed to enumerate the different rocks, commencing with those of the oldest formation.
SUBMEDIAL OR TRANSITION ROCKS.
Rocks which may be referred to this class compose the principal portion of the Blue Mountain Range, and are continued in a North-east direction through the parish of St. George into that of St. Mary. They are the oldest rocks which occur in the part of Jamaica examined by me: and from the information which I have obtained, there does not appear to be any rock of equal age in the other or western portion. Theboundary lines of these rocks may be described, commencing with St. Mary's, as forming the whole of the coast of the latter parish, eastward from the mouth of the Agua Alta or Wag Water to within a mile or two of Ora Cabessa Bay, with the exception of Jack's Bay, Don Christopher's Point, Blowing Point, Forster's Cove, Green Cove, Pagee Point, Fort Haldane, and the small island opposite Port Maria; in all which places the submedial rocks are covered by a part of the white limestone formation to be mentioned hereafter. The latter formation rests upon and bounds the above rocks in the vicinity of Eden estate near Ora Cabessa. From thence, after crossing a hill, the line passes at the foot of the high white limestone hills that rise above the submedial country in the neighbourhood of the Union and Ramble estates; and afterwards passes at the base of a continuation of the above high land to the vicinity of Unity and Non-Such estates. From the latter point the line is continued a little to the south of Konigsburg, and crosses the Agua Alta to the north of its confluence with the Ugly River; —in this part of its course the submedial country is covered by red sandstone and conglomerate.
Quitting the parish of St. Mary, the southern boundary line of these rocks crosses the mountains which separate the Agua Alta from the Buff Bay River to the northern face of Catherine's Peak, then enters Port Royal parish, following the course of the Yallahs River for some distance, and afterwards, skirts the base of the Blue Mountain Range through St. David's to Bath in St. Thomas-in-the-East. From the latter place, round the coast, to Port Antonio, the submedial country is separated from the sea by the white limestone formation, except near the latter place, where porphyry intervenes between them.
From Port Antonio to Annotto Bay the northern boundary line of these rocks passes at some little distance from the coast through the parishes of Portland and St. George, gradually approaching the sea as it reaches Annotto Bay. Upon the Swift, Great Spanish, and Buff Bay rivers these rocks will be observed separated from the white limestone formation by red sandstone. The following rocks constitute this submedial country. Grauwacke.—This rock is well exposed in St. Mary's, and varies in its structure from a fine-grained compact sandstone to a coarse conglomerate, both occurring in beds of various thickness and occasionally interstratified with grauwacke slate of various degrees of fineness. The colour of this rock varies from gray to brown; the conglomerate contains portions of quartz, syenite, &c. from the size of a nut to three or four inches in diameter.
The road from Porster's Cove to Port Maria affords several fine sections of slaty and compact grauwacke; the inland road from Port Maria to Islington estate does the same, more particularly near Quebec estate, between which place and Port Maria there is a good exhibition of the compact variety in thick beds. The strata of this district, though they sometimes undulate, and therefore have the appearance of inclining in contrary directions, dip generally to the S.W. at angles varying from 30° to 50°. There are, however, some thick conglomerate beds, which though of rather an ambiguous character, more resemble the grauwacke conglomerate of Jamaica, than any other rock which I observed in the island; these dip to the N. at Porster's Cove. Between the latter place and Islington, thin beds and nodules of compact grayish blue limestone occur among the grauwacke rocks. Near Albion estate, not far from Port Maria, compact sandstone beds, which appear to belong to the grauwacke series, will be observed, and between that place and Eden estate I found a compact sandstone with vegetable impressions; these were however but ill defined, and had the appearance of reeds, not of ferns. Large blocks of porphyry, with a dull green and rather earthy base containing white crystals of felspar and small grains of quartz, are found at Stony Cove: this rock would seem to be associated with the grauwacke.
The grauwacke beds on the coast at Carlton Wood House, a short distance eastward from Forster's Cove, dip at a considerable angle to the N.E., but at Agualta Vale Pen, under the hill upon which the house stands, is afforded a section of slaty and compact grauwacke beds, dipping at about an angle of 40° to the S.W.; so that the strata would appear to be arched between these two places, the latter of which is situated about five miles in a S.S.E. direction from the former.
Proceeding from Agualta Vale Pen up the Agua Alta, grauwacke occasionally composed of very thick beds of coarse conglomerate will be observed for some distance up the picturesque valley in which the river flows.
The valley of the Buff Bay River affords a somewhat different section of the grauwacke. Ascending the river, and after passing some red sandstone, among which porphyritic rocks are seen, we meet with thick beds of a brownish red compact sandstone, mixed with slaty marl, and very much resembling the old red sandstone of South Wales: this sandstone gradually loses its colour, passes into gray sandstone, and becomes mixed with coarse slate, reminding the observer of the passages of old red sandstone into grauwacke in England, &c. The grauwacke continues for some distance up the river, and then seems gradually to pass into a blueish marly slate (which slightly effervesces) mixed with grayish sandstone (grauwacke) and beds of dark gray compact limestone (traversed by numerous veins of calcareous spar), which latter become more abundant after passing Belcarres.
The dip of the grauwacke beds on the Buff Bay River is to the N.E. and N.N.E., being the same with the Carlton Wood House beds: this afterwards becomes the nearly general dip of the submedial rocks composing the Blue Mountain Range.
The Great Spanish and Swift rivers present little or no section of grauwacke; the rock which succeeds the red sandstones in those places being principally composed of slaty marl with sandstone, and nodules and beds of compact gray limestone, such as occur beneath the grauwacke on the Buff Bay River.
The Rio Grande, the next great river to the eastward that cuts the Blue Mountain Range, affords sections of grauwacke closely resembling those of St. Mary's. The road from Port Antonio to Golden Vale is interesting in this respect, as thin beds of grauwacke sandstones intermixed with argillaceous slates are there observable dipping from E.S.E. to S.E.
The higher part of the Cunha Cunha road, between Port Antonio and Bath (St. Thomas-in-the-East) and over the continuation of the Blue Mountains, presents a mixture of brown and gray slaty and compact grauwacke beds, interstratified near the summit of the mountain with a conglomerate, in which the rounded pebbles are often of large size, and which evidently belongs to the same series: in fact, the mechanical origin of grauwacke is well exhibited in Jamaica, its beds varying from a fine-grained sandstone to a conglomerate, the-pebbles in which are often of considerable size.
I have observed but little of this rock on the southern side of the Cold Ridge, unless indeed the gray compact siliceous sandstone mixed with slate and thin beds of gray compact limestone, occurring on the northern side of Catherine's Peak, be considered a variety of it.
Ascending the mountain from the Buff Bay River, which is commonly known by the name of St. George's Gap, a rock is seen partly composed of a kind of marly argillaceous slate, apparently grauwacke, some of its beds resembling those found on the Agua Alta. These dip to the N.E., and therefore would appear to underlie the limestones of the Buff Bay River; they however seem mixed near the summit of the mountain with red-sandstone and red conglomerate beds, resembling those found on the Buff Bay River, to the south of Charles Town Maroon Town, and noticed above as passing into grauwacke: these red beds are the more remarkable as they also very much resemble those found on the summit and southern face of the same mountain, which would appear to constitute parts of a newer formation than the grauwacke. The beds of red-sandstone and conglomerate associated with the grauwacke on the northern side of St. George's Gap dip at a considerable angle to the N.E., while the beds on the summit and southern face of the mountain dip at a great angle to the S.W.: the dips become so suddenly altered that it is somewhat difficult to suppose them arched.
Submedial or Transition Limestone. 
The Buff Bay River affords a fine section of grayish blue compact limestone, traversed by more or less numerous veins of calcareous spar, and altogether resembling, in mineralogical structure, the common submedial or transition limestones of Europe. I did not discover organic remains in it, such as belong to similar rocks in other parts of the world,—in fact I was not fortunate enough to meet with any; but occurring as it does among the rocks mentioned above, and being so completely associated with them, there can be little doubt that they belong to the same epoch of formation: and, if the sandstones, conglomerates, and argillaceous slates mentioned above were formed at the same time with the grauwacke rocks of Europe, the limestones under consideration must be submedial or transition limestones.
The upper beds of these limestones are much mixed with sandstones; the latter however gradually disappear, and the former become alone associated with a marly slate containing calcareous matter. These strata are frequently much contorted and twisted, of which the river sections afford many fine examples; no great dependence can therefore be placed on dips: it may, nevertheless, be as well to state that at Belcarres, the strata dip to the N.W., having previously dipped to the N.N.E. The marly slate becomes very abundant as we approach the ascent of the mountain to St. George's Gap, some short distance up Avhich these strata are continued.
It should be remarked that a kind of coal is stated to have been found among the Belcarres strata. I had no opportunity of examining a specimen from this place, but should conceive that it must be of the Anthracite kind. A similar substance, I was informed, had been found at Guatamala upon the Cave River, which flows into the Swift River, but in what rock it would be difficult to say, for there are beds of red-sandstone at that place as well as the limestone and marly beds, which cross over from the Buff Bay River. The latter rocks are exposed to view on the Swift and Great Spanish rivers; and the iron pyrites found among them on the banks of the former have been mistaken for gold.
Submedial limestones occur occasionally on the southern side of the Blue Mountain Range from the head of the Yallahs River to the neighbourhood of Bath, in St. Thomas-in-the-East, sometimes associated with sandstones and slates having a grauwacke appearance; at others, with greenstones, syenites, and other trap rocks, in a singular manner.
Thin beds of compact gray blue limestone are seen connected with slaty shale in the vicinity of Clifton (near Catherine's Peak); these dip at an angle of45°totheE.N.E.
The Green River which falls into the Yallahs River near Green Valley Works, brings down, in its course from the Cold Ridge, a considerable quantity of compact grayish blue limestone, which shows that this rock occurs in this part of the Blue Mountains. Blueish-gray limestone may also be observed near Green Valley.
Abbey Green, St. David's, situate on the southern side of the Cold Ridge, is one of the highest coffee settlements in Jamaica: the house upon it I make by barometrical measurement to be 4233 feet above the level of the sea. At this place submedial limestone of a gray colour, and traversed by veins of calcareous spar, will be found associated in a rather singular manner with syenite, greenstone, grauwacke, and argillaceous slate, the superposition of one above the other being very indistinct; so that little can be learned from this spot, which would, if a better section were afforded, be highly interesting in a geological point of view, as the limestone is here seen close to the trap rocks, and does not appear, from what is exposed by section, to have suffered much if any alteration. Not far from Portland Gap (a depression in the Cold Ridge which I estimate from barometrical observations to be 5642 feet above the sea), and on the road to that place from Abbey Green, I found a large block of grayish white limestone approaching the crystalline or saccharine character, and somewhat resembling the primitive limestones; it was however most probably derived from some bed associated with the submedial rocks of the district, which is concealed beneath the thick foliage of the tropical forest that rises above the spot where the block is found.
Sections of submedial limestone are afforded near Bath in St. Thomas-inthe-East: the best is that seen between the village and the hot spring, up the valley of the Sulphur River; a dark lilac-coloured compact limestone will be there observed connected with trap rocks and argillaceous slate. The Bath mineral spring, (the heat of which I found to be =127° Fahrenheit, the thermometer being plunged into the spring itself,) rises from a mixture of argillaceous slate and thin beds of compact gray limestone; trap rocks being however not far distant.
The first part of the ascent of the Cunha Cunha road from the Plantain Garden River presents a continuation of the beds exposed in the valley of the Sulphur River, a lilac-coloured limestone traversed by veins of calcareous spar being associated with argillaceous slate and trap. Higher up the mountain on the same road, a light gray limestone of very compact texture is seen forming part of the submedial country.
Argillaceous Slate.—I did not observe that this rock constituted by itself any considerable portion of the submedial or transition country of Jamaica; the variety, commonly called grauwacke slate, occurs however in considerable abundance in the parish of St. Mary, in some places not much mixed with the thick and compact grauwacke beds.
Argillaceous slate may occupy considerable space in the Blue Mountains, for there were many sections of this range which I had no opportunity of examining. This slate is found not only in those places where this rock has been mentioned as occurring associated with others, but also beneath the white limestone formation on the ridge which separates the Morant from the Plantain Garden River, between Spring and Whitehall estates. It is also seen mixed with trap rocks in the bed of the Plantain Garden River from the latter place to Bath.
The mass of marly slate which occurs with the limestones from Belcarres on the Buff Bay River to the St. George's Gap Mountain can scarcely in strictness be called argillaceous slate, and therefore cannot fairly be classed under this head: it however forms so considerable a portion of country, and is such a conspicuous feature in the geology of this part of Jamaica, that it scarcely deserves to be considered as subordinate to the limestones.
Micaceous Slate and Hornstone.—The latter interstratified in thin beds with argillaceous slate of a micaceous lustre, is found on the ascent of the Blue Mountains between Green Valley and Sheldon. The hornstone is striped, and sometimes splits into a slate resembling flinty slate. These strata dip to the N.E. at angles varying from 60° to 70°, apparently beneath the mass of rocks which are crowned by the Blue Mountain Peaks.
A light-coloured sandstone is met with between Charlottenburg and Islington in the parish of St. Mary, which differs from the grauwacke of the country, and indeed from any grauwacke I have ever seen; yet as it occurs among this submedial district, and does not appear connected with any secondary rock its place would seem to be among the class of rocks under consideration: and I may also observe that there are some other strata in the same parish, particularly slaty brown marls with thin seams of white occasionally associated with them, which it would be difficult to separate from the grauwacke of Jamaica, though they differ from the grauwacke of Europe. These strata are observable in one or two places between Charlottenburg and Islington, as also on the mountain between Albion estate near Port Maria, and Eden near Ora Cabessa.
In the whole of this submedial or transition country I was not fortunate enough to meet with any fossil organic remains, except the vegetable impressions of the sandstone in the mountain between Port Maria and Ora Cabessa. 'I may therefore be asked why I have named the limestone associated with these rocks, transition or submedial limestone?—I can only reply, that it mineralo"-ically resembles the transition limestones that I have seen in various parts of Europe and Great Britain, and that it occurs with a sandstone and conglomerate very much resembling grauwacke, with argillaceous slate, syenites, o-reenstones, &c., in fact associated as submedial limestones often are in other parts of the world.
It should be remarked of this group of rocks, that the most general dip of the mass composing the Blue Mountain Range is to N.E. and E.N.E., most commonly at a considerable angle, which dip is continued into the northern part of St. Mary's parish near Carlton Wood House, but further north in the same parish the dip becomes reversed, and is to the S.W.; it continues S. or S.E. along the line of junction with the red-sandstone and conglomerate to the Agua Alta, so that the strata would seem to be arched in some parts of St. Mary's: the rocks however on the northern face of Catherine's Peak dip to the N.E.
The submedial strata of the eastern part of the island have a tendency to dip towards the sea in that direction: thus the grauwacke between Port Antonio and the Rio Grande, in the vicinity of Golden Vale estate, dips to the S.E. and E.S.E.; and some of the beds on the Cunha Cunha road sink to the eastward.
Trap Rocks associated icith the Submedial Rocks. 
Although it by no means follows that, because trap rocks are associated with submedial rocks, they should be of the same age with them, or formed at the same geological epoch; yet as a matter of convenience it may be as well to notice here the rocks of this nature, occurring among the submedial rocks of Jamaica, though they very much resemble other trap rocks of the same island, which are connected with a porphyritic conglomerate of more recent formation, to be mentioned in the sequel. That we should not always refer trap rocks to a more distant period of formation than the rocks which appear to rest upon them is well shown in the section afforded by the cliffs near Gouldtrop Road in Southern Pembrokeshire, where greenstone, passing into syenite, rises from beneath old red-sandstone, which seems to rest upon it, although a continuation of the same trap afterwards rests upon contorted carboniferous limestone and coal measures opposite to the anchorage in Gouldtrop Road: so that the same trap seen at one end of its course might be asserted (judging only from position) to have been formed at a period antecedent to the old red-sandstone; while, viewed at the other, it might be declared to be a newer formation than the carboniferous limestone and coal measures. So it might happen with the trap of Jamaica, which might easily have been thrown up among the submedial rocks at the same period with the trap occurring among the newer rocks; yet as an abundance of pebbles, evidently derived from trap rocks, are found among the red conglomerates which cover the submedial rocks of Jamaica, it is fair to infer that trap must have been associated with these latter rocks previous to the formation of the conglomerate. There seems, moreover, every reason to suppose that trap rocks, notwithstanding their general similarity of structure, have been formed at distant and distinct periods; one of these periods seems to have been that when the submedial or transition rocks were formed, and to this period may probably be referred that portion of the Jamaica trap rocks which I am about to mention, though, from the want of good sections, their connexion with the submedial rocks of this island is rather obscure.
I observed trap rocks in considerable abundance upon the southern side of the Blue Mountain Range; also upon that portion of it known as the Cold Ridge, and in the highest parts of the Blue Mountain Peak. Ascending towards the Blue Mountain Peaks by Sheldon, Abbey Green, and Portland Gap, I observed syenite, composed of white and flesh-coloured felspar, colourless quartz, and greenish black hornblende, in considerable abundance between Sheldon and Abbey Green, near Farm Hill: this syenite seemed to beassociated with grauwacke; in what manner, however, it would be difficult to say, as their relative position was very obscure.
Greenstone (white felspar, and blackish green hornblende, the grains being of a moderate size) is seen singularly mixed up with slate and limestone immediately above Abbey Green House; and between this place and Portland Gap, an association of porphyry, slate resembling grauwacke slate, greenstone and limestone will be met with. The porphyry is principally of a dark claystone or trappean base with white crystals of felspar varying in size in different places.
The ridge which extends from Portland Gap to the base of that from which the Blue Mountain Peaks rise here and there, presents, where the tangled and moss-covered roots will permit a portion of rock to appear, that variety of trap which is not unfrequently observable in districts composed of this class of rocks; it is not precisely a cornean, but in some instances approaches it; it occurs of a dark colour on this ridge, and gives out an earthy smell when breathed upon.
On the ridge from whence the highest Blue Mountain rises, I found a darkcoloured trappean rock, containing a very few small crystals of felspar in the mass; it gives out an earthy smell when breathed on, and occasionally has a sandstone appearance: the Peaks seemed in a great measure composed of a similar substance. I did not observe any greenstone, syenite, or porphyries upon the higher parts of the Cold Ridge or Blue Mountain Peaks, but merely the above rocks; their connexion with well characterized trap is therefore not clear, and they may be mere varieties of grauwacke or some other submedial rock, though from their general appearance, and their resemblance to rocks in some trappean districts elsewhere, I am inclined to refer them to the trappean class.
Trap will be observed mixed with argillaceous slate and grauwacke at the base of the Blue Mountain Range, between Whitehall and Bath (St. Thomasin-the-East); it is exposed in the bed of the Plantain Garden River, and is principally composed of a dark claystone porphyry, with crystals of white felspar, and of a rather earthy rock, of a gray, greenish, and occasionally reddish colour, traversed by numerous veins of a substance having a zeolitic character. This rock forms some picturesque cliffs upon the river, and presents no appearance of stratification.
Trap rocks occur, as before mentioned, mixed with limestone and grauwacke, on the first part of the ascent of the Cunha Cunha road from Bath, and in the valley of the Sulphur River between the latter place and the Hot Spring. The trap in these places is principally that last noticed, varying in colour, but not so much crossed by zeolitic veins as on the higher part of the Plantain Garden River.
MEDIAL OR CARBONIFEROUS ROCKS .
It is not without some hesitation that I refer the following rocks to this class, particularly as I have only observed the strata, which more immediately lead me to do so, in one place; these however so much resemble the coal measures of Europe in mineralogical structure, that, though confined to a small place, I conceived it would be better to class them for the present in this order.
But to commence with the lowest rocks, or those which rest upon the submedial country above noticed. On the Southern side of Catherine's Peak, and in the higher part of the valley of the Hope River which descends from it, a series of compact sandstone and conglomerate rocks principally of a red colour, will be observed: there are others which are gray, but they are more or less subordinate to the red. The sandstone varies in texture from extremely hard and compact to rather friable; the conglomerate also varies in its degree of hardness.
Under Greenwich Hill a very good section is obtained of these strata, which dip at about an angle of 40° to the S. W., and therefore appear to rest unconformably upon the limestones, gray sandstones, and shaly slate of the northern side and summit of Catherine's Peak. The beds vary in thickness from 4 to 12 feet, and are almost all red; the sandstone is mostly siliceous and compact; there are however beds of a marly red sandstone, and marl, insterstratified with the compact sandstones and conglomerates, which latter are composed of rounded pieces of granite (colourless quartz, reddish and white felspar, and black mica), large-grained greenstone, syenite, quartz, hornstone, &c. from the size of a walnut to three or four inches in diameter. These beds with those of slaty sandstone, mixed with beds of compact gray siliceous sandstone seen, on the ascent of the mountain, crowned by Catherine's Peak, seem to compose the lowest part of this formation; which appears to be of considerable thickness, judging from the section afforded by the valley of the Hope River, and, but for the very great difference of dips, would seem to pass into the sub medial class.
But to continue the Hope Valley section.—At Middleton House, which I estimate, from barometrical observations, to be 2340 feet above the level of the sea, thick beds of very compact gray siliceous sandstone are seen forming a high cliff to the west of the house*; these strata cross the river, into the bed of which large blocks of sandstone and the conglomerate have fallen.
There are some marly strata above Hopewell, a little further down the river than Middleton, in which veins of white and rose-coloured gypsum occur; these strata are mixed with others of sandstone, and the whole seems to constitute a part of the same formation with the red and gray sandstones and conglomerates composing the upper portion of the Hope Valley section; for rocks similar to the latter again come in between Hopewell and the limestones of Mount Pleasant. The beds here mentioned present a mixture of thick strata composed of siliceous sandstones, with conglomerates, formed of rounded pieces of older rocks, and cemented by the same kind of siliceous sandstone, occasionally interstratined with slaty sandstone. The dip of these strata is generally at a considerable angle to the S.W., they are in some places perpendicular, and appear to have suffered much disturbance.
At Mount Pleasant a blackish gray compact limestone comes in, some of the beds of which are traversed by numerous veins of calcareous spar, in general appearance very much resembling many beds of the carboniferous limestone in the vicinity of Bristol, such as that of Clifton, &c. I observed what appeared to be encrinal remains in the Mount Pleasant limestone, as also sections of bivalve shells. These limestone beds dip at about an angle of 75° to the eastward, which is by no means conformable to the mass of red-sandstone and conglomerate rocks in which they seem in some measure included; yet a collection of similar limestones, not much more in the whole than 50 or 60 feet thick, crosses a valley near the Mount Pleasant beds in an East and West direction, and seems to be connected with them. The same kind of limestone beds are found near Flamstead House, in the Port Royal Mountains. The dip is not clearly shown at this place; but the limestones are associated in the same manner as those near Mount Pleasant, and appear to be a continuation of them; for patches of compact gray blue limestone may be seen in several places between Flamstead and the Botanical Garden. Now Mount Pleasant is situated in a north-westerly direction from Flamstead, and this is precisely that of the red-sandstones and conglomerates of the district, for their direction is N.W. and S.E.; so that the Mount Pleasant limestones may be referred to the place I have assigned them, notwithstanding the dip. Thick beds of yellowish and decomposed sandy rock occur in the vicinity of the above limestones both at Flamstead and Mount Pleasant. The limestones of the latter place appear to be succeeded for a short distance by sandstones and conglomerates, resembling those above mentioned.
Next in order above these appear, nearly opposite the Botanical Garden, a series of shale, schistose sandstone, and more compact sandstone beds which very closely resemble, in mineralogical structure, the coal measures of some parts of England, and the probability of their being such becomes the greater, from the circumstance that thin seams of coal are observed among them. I met with only three of these seams of not more than an inch, and an inch and a half in thickness; how numerous they may be, it would be difficult to say, as the section presented was of no great size ; yet I do not suspect that there are any beds of this substance that would be worth working for useful purposes.
The general dip of these beds is to the S.W., sometimes at a considerable angle; they therefore dip conformably with the sandstone and conglomerate rocks on which they seem to rest *. I searched in vain for the vegetable impressions, generally termed coal plants, from being found among the true coal measures, which these beds nevertheless very much resemble: they are covered by a brownish red conglomerate principally composed of rounded pieces of porphyry, mixed with pebbles of other trap rocks, sandstones, &c., the whole being associated with porphyries and trap rocks. This conglomerate would appear referable to the same epoch of formation as the rothe todte liegende of the Germans. According to some geologists the whole of the rocks here enumerated might be included under the head of red-sandstone (gres rouge), the coal measures being merely subordinate. Humboldt conceives that " le gres houiller et le porphyre constituent une meme formation (rothes todies liegende), variable d'aspect, et d'une structure souvent tres-compliqueef;" and D'Aubisson states that " la grande formation de gres houiller se divise tres-convenablement en deux parties; l'une comprend le terrain houiller proprement dit; et l'autre le gres, appele, dans la Thuringe, gres rouge, avec ses couches subordonnees: mais tout en distinguant ces deux parties, nous remarquerons qu'elles appartiennent a la meme formation; et quoique le terrain houiller soit le plus souvent au-dessous, il lui arrive quelquefois d'etre entremele, et meme d'etre superpose au gres rouge J." The same author again remarks, that "le gres, masse principale du terrain houiller, prend souvent une grande extension, en abandonnant, au moins en majeure partie, la houille avec I'argile schisteuse qui l'enveloppe, et il constitue des terrains d'une grande etendue. II a ete principalement observe en Thuringe, ou il est connu sous le nom de rothe-todte-liegende. 
Viewing these sandstones and conglomerates in the manner of many continental geologists, they would form one mass with the porphyritic conglomerate to be mentioned hereafter. Humboldt considers the whole as one formation when describing the gres rouge of New Spain, Venezuela, New Grenada, the plateau of Quito, Peru, and the banks of the Amazon, which the Jamaica rocks under consideration will be found very much to resemble.
Dr. Buckland and Mr. Conybeare remark on this subject, that "in the south-western coal district of England we have three formations of red sandstone, the newer red sandstone, the millstone grit, and the old red sandstone, all liable to be confounded with one another owing to their prevailing red colour, and to their containing beds of conglomerate; and as similar rocks occur, very similarly placed, in various parts of the earth's surface, we find three opinions maintained concerning red-sandstone, and each moreover supported by indisputable facts: one that it lies over the coal measures; another, that it lies beneath them ; and a third, that it is a member of the coal formation."
"The millstone grit affords the best example in the south-western coalfield of a red sandstone belonging to the coal measures. But occasionally even in this coal-field, and very frequently in the coal districts on the continent, all the coal-grits acquire a red colour; and for this reason we now find it to be the prevailing opinion among the continental geologists, that the gres rouge is a member of the coal formation."
In fact supposing the red conglomerate occurring between the magnesian limestone and coal measures, the latter and the old red sandstone to come together, the carboniferous limestone being wanting, and the coal-grits generally red, it would be most difficult to say where the one begins or the other ends; and I consider this to be the case in Jamaica: for although in the valley of the Hope River, the rocks, which I take to represent the coal measures, do present a marked appearance for a short space, they seem included among the red sandstones.
With regard to the other places in Jamaica where I have observed the red sandstones and conglomerates, the map will express better than words, the space occupied by them; I shall therefore only offer remarks on those places where sections may in some measure be obtained.
Upon the summit of St. George's Gap thick beds of red sandstone are observable, which with numerous similar beds interstratified with red conglomerates dip to the S. W. on the southern side of the mountain; and, as before observed, strata, which bear considerable resemblance to these, are found associated with the submedial rocks on the northern face of the same mountain: this circumstance would make it appear probable that the red sandstone passes into the grauwacke, if it were not for the very sudden change of dip in the two red sandstones on both sides of the mountain.
Descending from St. George's Gap to the Kingston plain on the south, beds of red sandstone and conglomerate are met with, precisely resembling those that occur on the Hope River, of which indeed they form the continuation, St. George's Gap being part of Catherine's Peak ridge. These are succeeded and covered by a light-coloured sandstone, most probably the same that occurs near the limestone and coal measures on the Hope River, I did not however perceive any of the latter rocks on the descent from the Gap.
The Agua Alta or Wag Water presents a section of red sandstones and conglomerates, which would appear to be a continuation of those above described, and which are particularly interesting, as an evident passage takes place between them and the grauwacke sandstones and conglomerates of St. Mary's. The road from Annotto Bay to Scot's Hall (Maroon Town) traverses some elevated land in order to avoid a great bend in the Agua Alta, where the Ugly River flows into it. The grauwacke which is here principally composed of thick conglomerate beds contains a few strata of a red colour; these afterwards become more numerous to the exclusion of the gray beds; slaty beds of the latter colour may however be occasionally observed among the red sandstones some little distance to the south of the elevated land. These rocks therefore seem to pass into one another; in fact the change is at first scarcely more than that of colour, the component parts of the gray and red beds closely resembling each other.
The lower beds of old red sandstone sometimes graduate (as is well known) into grauwacke upon which it reposes; therefore, if the St. Mary's rocks be considered as grauwacke, we may not unfairly conclude that the sandstones and conglomerates of Scot's Hall (Maroon Town) represent the old red sandstones of the English series. From the circumstance of old red sandstone passing into grauwacke it is usual for continental geologists to consider it as a variety of the latter rock: Humboldt does so in his "Essai Geognostique sur le Gisement des Roches," (p. 157,) and divides it from the gres rouge of the French and the rothe todte liegende of the German geologists, to which latter rock an eminent British geologist considers it should be referred. A short distance to the south of Scot's Hall (Maroon Town) these sandstones and conglomerates disappear, and are succeeded by trap rocks; their dip varies, but is principally to the southward; I observed it once S.E. on the elevated land where these beds pass into grauwacke.
At Green Castle, situated on a mountain a short distance westward from Scot's Hall (Maroon Town), these red sandstones and conglomerates are well exposed, as also between Green Castle and Konigsburg estate. The conglomerates in these places are principally composed of rounded pieces of trappean rocks, and among the latter are greenstones and beautiful porphyries: the beds dip at about 45° to the S.W. near Green Castle, but they are nearly perpendicular not far from the same place. On the road to Konigsburg the strata dip in some places to the N.W. Among the contents of a conglomerate bed near Green Castle House, 1 found a rolled agate and a rounded piece of green carbonate of copper.
A considerable number of porphyry pebbles are found in the conglomerates on the banks of the river by which the road passes from the Green Castle to Konigsburg; this causes the rock more to resemble the red conglomerates of Teignmouth, &c. in Devonshire, than old red sandstone; yet as porphyries are much mixed with those Jamaica rocks that are inferior to it, more particularly in the Blue Mountain district, there seems no reason why rolled pieces of that substance should not occur abundantly in these conglomerates, which rest on them.
A passage of these rocks into the grauwacke-looking rocks of St. Mary's will be observed near Konigsburg, where the red beds become extremely marly, and pass into a gray shaly slate much mixed up with the grauwacke of St. Mary's. After all there may be a mixture of rothe todte liegende and old red sandstone in this district, between which it would be almost impossible to distinguish.
On the Buff Bay River, and on the Southward of Charles Town, there are thick beds of red sandstone and conglomerate, which pass, as before stated, into the submedial rocks of that district; these beds very much resemble those at the head of the Hope River, and very probably belong to the same epoch of formation.
Among the Port Royal Mountains a considerable quantity of these rocks will be observed, closely agreeing in composition with the red sandstones and conglomerates of the Hope River, of which in fact they form the continuation.
Between Guava Ridge and the Yallahs River, but nearest the latter place, there are thick beds of very compact siliceous sandstone, which apparently belong to the red sandstone formation of Jamaica; some parts of it are so quartzose as to resemble M. von Humboldt's description of his "Roche de Quartz Secondaire," which he mentions as occurring in the Andes of Peru between the 7th and 8th degrees of southern latitude. He states that this rock is less developed on the eastern than on the western side of these mountains, and that on the latter it is many thousand feet thick, and replaces the gres rouge. 
Near Cocoa Walk estate on the Yallahs River, St. David's, twisted beds of brown conglomerate, in which porphyry pebbles are abundant, are seen by the road side on the right bank of the river; these are much mixed with slate clay, which is also twisted and contorted, and resembles that found among the coal measures of the Hope River. These rocks are also observable on the left bank beneath a mountain capped by the white limestone formation, and the whole of the conglomerate and slaty beds are referrible to the rocks under consideration.
SUPERMEDIAL, OR SECONDARY ROCKS.
Porphyritic conglomerate associated with Porphyry and other Trap rocks. —These rocks would, according to the views of those geologists who consider red sandstone (gres rouge) as one great formation, in which coal measures are subordinate, be classed with the red sandstones and conglomerates above noticed. I have however here separated them, as they are, in Jamaica, associated in a remarkable manner with porphyry and trap rocks, which the others are not.
The great characteristic of the conglomerate is, that the pebbles contained in it are principally, and in some cases entirely, composed of various kinds of porphyry, and are almost always of some kind of trap rock. The cementing matter is most frequently a reddish brown argillaceous substance of various degrees of hardness; and the cement is in some places so obscure, that the pebbles have the appearance of being joined together by a trappean substance.
I refer these rocks to the same epoch of formation as the porphyritic conglomerates of Exeter and Teignmouth, which are by many considered as the English equivalent to the German rothe todte liegende, or that part of it which rests upon the coal measures. The rocks of this geological epoch are often, as is well known, found associated with porphyry, which has obtained the name of Porphyre secondaire with the French, and Porphyr gebirge with the Germans. In like manner the porphyritic conglomerate of Jamaica is so much mixed with porphyries and other trap rocks, that it will be necessary to describe them together.
The rocks cover what I have considered as coal measures nearly opposite the Botanical Garden on the Hope River, and continue from thence to where the valley opens upon the Liguanea plain near the Hope Tavern. Most of the conglomerate beds are here of a reddish brown colour, and are composed of rounded pieces of porphyries (principally claystone), of various greenstones, and other trap rocks, cemented by an argillaceous substance, which in some cases passes into a kind of trappean claystone: the general dip of the beds is at about an angle of 45° to the S.W., and their thickness varies from two to ten feet. These strata are associated in an obscure manner with porphyry. In one place the latter rock, with a dark claystone base containing crystals of white felspar, has the appearance of a bed interstratified with the conglomerate; but this may, as Dr. MacCulloch has shown, easily occur without the porphyry or trap actually forming a bed.
Not far from the Hope Tavern there is a porphyry, with a reddish brown trappean base containing white crystals of felspar, and higher up the valley there is another with a compact felspathic base containing crystals of white felspar and a few small grains of quartz.
By reference to the accompanying map, it will be seen that trap and porphyritic conglomerate extend from that mentioned on the Hope River northwesterly into St. Mary's, and south-easterly through Port Royal parish to the Yallahs River in St. David's. I shall in the first place enumerate the rocks and the changes they undergo in this range of country, which for some distance separates the red sandstones and conglomerates from the white limestone formation, occurring beneath the latter and above the former.
On the lower part of the descent from St. George's Gap to the plain of Liguanea brownish red porphyritic conglomerate agreeing with that of the Hope Valley covers the red sandstones and conglomerates, and is here and there mixed with greenstone. Apparently resting upon this, and on the lowest part of the descent, a considerable mass of syenite comes in, very closely resembling that found among the submedial country between Sheldon and Abbey Green, though here associated with more recent rocks: this syenite plunges beneath the inclined diluvial plain of Liguanea, which abuts against it, a few occasional patches of white limestone only intervening.
The Agua Alta presents a good section of these rocks between the northern base of Stony Hill and Scot's Hall (Maroon Town): near the former place brownish red porphyritic conglomerate occurs beneath the lower marls of the white limestone formation, and is succeeded by porphyries and other trap rocks of various composition and structure; the whole of which may be considered as one great mass with sometimes one ingredient predominating and sometimes another.
It should here be remarked that the trap of Jamaica is often very much decomposed to a considerable depth *, so as not to be always immediately recognised; but by careful examination hard portions will be found forming cliffs, beds of rivers, &c. where the structure can be examined. This decomposition of the Jamaica trap principally takes place in those varieties in which felspar forms a considerable portion of the mass; it would therefore seem to arise from the decomposition of this mineral, which has given way before the effects of a tropical climate.
A mountain of syenite composed of greenish black hornblende, flesh-coloured felspar, and colourless quartz, the latter mineral being rare, rises above Golden Spring estate (St. Andrew's) on the Agua Alta: this syenite resembles that of the descent from St. George's Gap, and is most probably a continuation of it. To enumerate all the varieties of trap found on the Agua Alta would be tedious ; it will be sufficient to state that porphyries, greenstones, and syenites seem to pass into each other. One rock however which occurs about two miles south from Scot's Hall (Maroon Town) deserves attention, being wholly, or very nearly so, composed of two varieties of felspar, differing in colour, so as to have the appearance of syenite at a short distance. This rock would seem referrible to that variety of compact felspar which Dr. MacCulloch denominates "crystalline-granular f:" the felspar however of the rock in question is common, not compact; but as that author remarks that "it seems doubtful whether this variety does not sometimes consist of an aggregation of common instead of compact felspar," it appears to be a rock of that class.
The road over the hills from Stony Hill to Green Castle (St. Mary's) presents trap rocks closely resembling that afforded by the Agua Alta, being not far distant from it. Between Belmont (St. Andrew's) and Green Castle I observed a porphyritic rock having a light brown earthy base containing crystals of whitish felspar, a few pieces of green hornblende, and a few specks of mica. Between the latter places I also found some masses of a steatitic rock mixed with trap, which latter was much decomposed to some depth throughout the greater part of this district.
In several places the trap had a sandy appearance arising from the decomposition of clinkstone, which, Dr. MacCulloch observes, "frequently acquires an arenaceous aspect on the surface after exposure to the weather; so as even to have been confounded with sandstone by incautious observers."
At Pimento Grove, a coffee settlement between Rio Magno Pen (St. Thomas-in-the-Vale) and Tremolesworth (St. Mary's), trap rocks are met with, which apparently are continued from those above mentioned. They here constitute mountains that rise among others of the white limestone formation, which latter rests upon and covers the trap on the North-east and Southwest. The trap in the vicinity of Pimento Grove principally consists of greenstone and porphyry. One singular variety of the latter composed of a dark claystone base studded with crystals of white felspar, will be observed on the left hand side of the road, having the porphyritic pieces or concretions rounded and separated from each other by a soft argillaceous substance, among which strings of chalcedony are sometimes found. The above is the only instance of this kind of structure that came under my observation while in Jamaica, with the exception of part of an extinct volcano to be mentioned hereafter. Here the porphyry is of a very common kind, and is associated with greenstone porphyries: one of these contains brownish red crystals of felspar, and crystals of augite; and another, grayish white crystals of felspar with crystals of augite; the last mineral being more abundant in the latter than in the former of these varieties.
In the neighbourhood of Williamsfield and Sandy Gully (St. Thomas-inthe-Vale) greenstone and porphyry, very much decomposed where exposed to the weather, form the lower parts of the valley, which has all the characters of a valley of denudation, the higher parts of the mountains being capped by white limestones, which seem once to have formed parts of the same mass. This trappean country appears to be connected with that range of trap, above described, which extends from St. David's north westerly into St. Mary's; its junction with it being concealed by the white limestone formation on the East of Williamsfield, &c. Another portion of decomposed trap appears on the road between Williamsfield and Hampshire estates. 
A small portion of porphyritic conglomerate occurs near Mount Sinai estate, on the Yallahs River, being a continuation of the Hope River porphyritic conglomerates on the South-east; it is however greatly covered up on the Yallahs River by the white limestone formation.
Another extensive district of trap rocks, constituting the principal part of the St. John's Mountains, and extending westerly into Clarendon, occurs at a considerable distance from that which has been above described, and is surrounded on all the sides which I have examined by the white limestone formation: it however seems referrible to the same epoch of formation as that above noticed. Ascending the St. John's Mountains by the road from St. Dorothy's Rectory to Luidas Vale, trap appears on the northern side of the river near Mountain River estate, forming the greater part of the mountain on which the Barracks are placed. Greenstone and porphyry are here seen in general very much decomposed, as is very commonly the case in the St. John's Mountains. Among these rocks I found a very fine-grained greenstone, as also a purplish brown rock, apparently with a decomposed felspathic base, in which were a few light greenish spots of decomposed felspar. The porphyries are in such a state of decomposition to a considerable depth, that their various bases cannot be distinguished without considerable difficulty: I however met with one fragment having a blackish green claystone base, with crystals of greenish white felspar. This trap mountain is covered towards Luidas Vale by the white limestone formation, which also occurs in patches upon it, as may be seen at the Barracks, &c.
A decomposed trap rock occurs at Pleasant Hill among these mountains; and this spot is interesting, as the trap can be observed almost in contact with the white limestone that bounds it on the northward, and forms the slope of the mountain towards Luidas Vale.
That part of the St. John's Mountains which is represented on the map as composed of the rocks under consideration, may be described as formed of various claystone porphyries, greenstones, and rocks approaching the basaltic character, with various modifications of that rock "of which," says Dr. MacCulloch, "indurated clay or wacke may be placed at one extreme, and compact felspar at the other; the intermediate member being claystone and clinkstone *." These rocks pass into each other in such a manner that it is impossible to say what extent of country is occupied by any one. They are well exposed on the Juan de Bolas Great River, forming picturesque cliffs of various heights on both banks. Considerable variety will be found in the vicinity of Lemon Hall estate on this river. The porphyries are there principally composed of a dark claystone base with white crystals of felspar; the base of some have the appearance of a fine-grained greenstone, and I observed one with a brownish red claystone base and reddish white crystals of felspar. Among the other trap rocks of this place I remarked a fine-grained greenstone-looking rock containing small brilliant facets, which effervesce and appear to be carbonate of lime.
The trap mountains of St. John's attain considerable elevation, and are formed into very sharp ridges winding considerably, the course of the main ridges being about East and West.
The St. John's trap extends into that part of Clarendon which is principally drained by the mountain portion of the Rio Minho, and the streams descending from the elevated land of which the Bull Head forms the highest part. Porphyritic conglomerate is seen stratified near Savoy estate (Clarendon), with a dip of a few degrees to the Eastward: the same rock, which corresponds with the porphyritic conglomerate of the Hope River, is also found at Morgan's Valley. Porphyry appears to be associated with the conglomerate near Savoy estate.
A porphyry occurs near Port Antonio (Portland), separating the white limestone from the submedial rocks; but the manner in which it is exposed makes it difficult to refer it to any particular epoch of formation. This rock will be observed not far from the town on the road to Moore Town (a Maroon town); it consists of a reddish gray earthy claystone base, with crystals of white felspar, and crystals of augite. Not far from this there is another porphyry having a reddish brown claystone base, containing small reddish crystals of felspar intermingled with moderately sized crystals of augite.
To this list may be added the earthy claystone rocks which are found in one part of the descent from Monte Diablo into St. Thomas-in-the-Vale, and form some part of the southern face of that mountain; among them may be seen a porphyritic rock composed of a light brown earthy base thinly sprinkled with white crystals of felspar. From the information I received it would seem probable that trap forms the southern part of the mountain range which extends from Monte Diablo towards the north-eastern part of St. Thomas-in the-Vale.
SUPERIOR OR TERTIARY ROCKS?
To this order, the white limestone formation, which occupies such a considerable portion of Jamaica, would seem, if we only take into consideration the character of its fossil organic remains, in some measure referrihle. Still however I have many doubts upon the subject; and therefore, while I class it for the present under the above head, I wish it to be understood as merely a temporary arrangement. This formation is principally composed of white limestone, varying considei-ably in its texture, which is most frequently very close; and, when so, strongly resembling the compact varieties of the Jura limestones, such as they occur among the Jura Mountains, and in the lower part of the Mont Saleve near Geneva: in fact, specimens from the latter place, and from some of the Jamaica white limestones, present scarcely any difference. The white limestone of Jamaica is not however, taken generally, of an homogeneous composition, some parts of the same stratum being more argillaceous than others; these latter parts becoming decomposed by the action of the atmosphere, the surface is full of inequalities, from which circumstance the name of homy-comb rock is very generally applied to it by the Jamaica colonists. In consequence of the decomposed surface of the rock, and the thick forests by which it is generally covered, the stratification is often very difficult to determine. The strata are moreover often of very considerable thickness,—from 10 to 20 feet. This compact white limestone is, in some districts, interstratified with thick beds of red marl and sandstone, as also with white chalky marl.
The compact white limestone, with its associated beds, constitutes the main or middle part of the formation, and contains organic remains, generally casts: beneath these limestones there are beds of sands and marls, the latter containing fibrous gypsum, and being often associated with bluish gray compact limestones, sometimes traversed by veins of calcareous spar.
In this lower part of the formation there are beds of yellowish white limestone, which are more earthy than the others, and contain a greater abundance of organic remains, among which a gigantic cerithium may be noticed, together with echinites, spines of echinites, ostreae, &c. Some beds are principally composed of the remains of broken shells.
The upper beds of this formation are generally chalky, sandy and marly: still however many beds are very compact, and in general texture and appearance agree with those of the central portion. This upper part contains the fossil remains of the genera Conus, Cerithium, Astarte, Natica, &c.; and near the sea coast in the parishes of St. Thomas-in-the-East, Portland, St. George, and St. Mary, a considerable quantity of corals, which frequently have almost a recent appearance.
The following is a list of the fossil organic remains which I procured from the white limestone formation of Jamaica:
This formation is of considerable depth in several places, particularly in the parishes of Manchester, Clarendon, St. Ann, St. Thomas-in-the-Vale, and St. David; its thickness in some of these places cannot be less than from 2000 to 3000 feet.
In enumerating the localities of this formation, I shall begin with the parish of Manchester; because that parish forms the south-western portion of the part of Jamaica which I propose to describe, and moreover the middle of the formation can be well studied among its mountains.
The road from Mount Pleasant in Clarendon, over the mountains to New Forest near Alligator Pond Bay, presents a great mixture of the compact white limestone with a red sandstone: the latter seldom appears on the surface in an undecomposed state, its place being very generally marked by a red marly soil. The mass of these rocks has a southerly dip, where the dense vegetation will permit an examination. On the descent of Plowden Hill towards New Forest, compact white limestone is seen interstratified with rather compact red sandstone, which contains nodules and stripes of the white limestone, evidently of contemporaneous formation with it. The beds are slightly curved, and dip sometimes at 35°, at others at 40° to the S.W.
The neighbourhood of New Forest, near Alligator Pond Bay, presents singular mixtures of the white limestone with the red sandstone: the most remarkable of these are found among the Plains (as they are called) of St. Elizabeth's, included between the Santa Cruz Mountains and those of Manchester, and terminating near Alligator Pond Bay. Small patches of rock, rising from ten to twenty feet above the level of the plain, are abundantly scattered over its surface, presenting at some distance the appearance of numerous clumps of trees, distributed over an immense park. These rocky patches are composed of compact white limestone, and the rest of the plain principally of red sandstone; thus giving to the former the appearance of the remains of continuous strata, the greater part of which has been swept away. This would in some measure seem the case; for although the lower limestone strata of these rocky patches are often much intermingled with the red sandstone, and are evidently of contemporaneous formation with it, still the upper strata terminate so suddenly, that there is some reason for believing that they once extended to a much greater distance than they do at present: thus making it probable that the patches formed continuous strata which have in a great measure been destroyed by denudation, in the same manner as is shown by the larger masses of rock found isolated in other parts of the world.
These patches may also be accounted for by supposing the white limestone patches to have been included among the red sandstone strata, in the same manner as smaller portions are now seen in the same neighbourhood; so that when the plains were formed into their present state, the red sandstone, which was softer than the limestone, may be supposed to have given way before the causes which have produced most of the present inequalities in the earth's surface, while the limestone was left. I observed that the white limestone beds of many of these patches had a slight dip to the S. W.
The intimate mixture of red sandstone and white limestone in the neighbourhood of New Forest occurs frequently in the same strata, and in such a manner as would make it most difficult to be accounted for except by the theory of contemporaneous formation. There are however other mixtures of the two substances which must have had a different origin, such as the breccias and conglomerates in the same district. These are composed of either fragments or rounded pieces of white limestone, but principally of the latter, cemented by red sandstone, or an arenaceous substance of a lighter colour, approaching to yellowish brown, and presenting much the same appearance as the cementing matter of some magnesian or dolomitic conglomerates. It does not however contain any magnesia; for Dr. Daubeny*, to whom I gave specimens for examination, states that "not one of them contains any appreciable quantity of magnesia." The pieces of white limestone are so much rounded in the conglomerate, that they appear to have been derived from the forcible destruction of some of the beds by water, anterior to the formation of a considerable portion of the Jamaica white limestone. The red arenaceous rock mixed with the limestone near New Forest, is in a great measure calcareous. The white limestone of this place varies in its degree of hardness, but is principally compact; in one instance I observed it of a crystalline structure with thin spathose divisions.
Quitting the Plain or Savannah above-mentioned, and ascending Marlbro' Hill, white limestone will be seen dipping to the S.W. The May Day Hills are composed of a mixture of white limestone, red sandstone, and white marls, which are continued down the beautiful valley with the inharmonious name of Mile Gully, a name moreover altogether inappropriate as applied to this valley, which is many miles long, and any thing but a gully. The general dip of the whole limestone formation of Manchester appears to be at various angles to the S.W.
The Round Hill in Vere is formed of a continuation of the Manchester white limestones, and is remarkable for the warm saline spring that rises out of the limestone near its base, at the place called the Bath*. The white limestone formation would indeed seem in some measure saliferous, for salt is found in the Long Mountain near Kingston, produced apparently by the evaporation of saline dippings from the rockf. Among the limestones of the Bath in Vere, is one of a roseate flesh-colour, which might be made useful for ornamental purposes.
The Mocho Mountains in Clarendon are composed of the same rocks as those of Manchester, the red sandstone being much more scarce. The stratification of the Mocho Mountain limestones is in general difficult to determine, from the thickness of the forests by which they are covered, and from the decomposed surface of the beds, which are often honey-combed to a considerable depth.
The traverse over these mountains by the Rock road exposes a considerable quantity of compact white limestone, the beds of which would seem to vary from 3 to 20 feet in thickness; for I observed blocks that must have belonged to rocks of at least the latter size. Between the higher part of the road and Four Paths estate, white marls come in, and are succeeded by a yellowish and rather arenaceous rock effervescing with acids. The glen through which the road winds to Halse Hall Crawle presents cliffs in which the white limestones appear to dip to the Southward at about an angle of 15°. In two or three places on the ascent, red sandstone will be observed interstratified with the white limestone; and at the Crawle itself I found casts of univalves and bivalves in the limestone.
We find the lower beds of this formation in the neighbourhood of Chapelton, (Clarendon,) between which place and Four Paths estate above-mentioned, the road exposes white marl, which is followed by whitish friable sand mixed with gray, and a little red, marl: these beds dip to the N.N.E. at about 45°. At Chapelton a whitish calcareous marl contains portions of yellowish limestone full of broken fossil shells, some of which may be easily recognised as of the Ostrea genus. Among these rocks I found specimens of the large Cerithium formerly mentioned. Lower down the hill upon which Chapelton stands, white limestones mixed with white marls and sands, some of which are red, continue to where the whole formation seems to rest upon porphyritic conglomerate. On the road to Savoy estate, a reddish and white small-grained conglomerate, the pebbles in which are mostly porphyritic, rests upon the other, and may either belong to the lower part of the white limestone formation or the upper portion of the porphyritic conglomerate.
The Barquadier road from Chapelton to the plains of Clarendon shows that the limestones of that part of the Mocho Mountains dip at the first part of the descent at an angle of 15° to the E. by S., and further down at about 20° to the S.E. These limestones are continued to Lime Savannah, between which place and Denbigh estate, in a woody part of the road not far from the former, a small-grained conglomerate is interstratified with them, the pebbles of which are principally quartzose.
The white limestone formation is continued from the Mocho Mountains across the Rio Minho, and forms the mountains on the left bank of the river, which gradually fall into the low hills which separate the plains of Clarendon and Vere from that of St. Dorothy's, and are continued to the sea in Old Harbour Bay. These low hills are also composed of the same formation, exhibiting a mixture of compact white limestone, and white and red marls; the latter being frequently traversed in different directions by white calcareous matter. In the rising behind Halse Hall House (Clarendon), which forms a part of these low hills, white marl rests upon compact white limestone, among which there is a breccia, composed of fragments of compact white limestone cemented by a yellowish-brown arenaceous and calcareous substance. In the white limestone behind Halse Hall House I found a Nautilus, Terebratulae, and Nummulites, with numerous casts of the genera Area, Astarte, Cardita, Cerithium, &c., and abundant casts of Astreae. The beds dip to the W.S.W. at about 20°.
Kemp's Hill, which rises out of the diluvial plain of Vere, is formed of white limestone, as is also the hill named Portland Ridge, the most southern part of Vere and of Jamaica; the connexion of these hills with the white limestones of Manchester, Clarendon and Vere, is concealed, and covered up bv diluvial and alluvial plains.
The formation under consideration is continued from Clarendon into St. Dorothy's and St. John's, forming a considerable portion of the mountains in the latter parish. At Wood Hall estate (in the former parish) it is found close to the trap, upon which it seems to rest, and from which it is separated by marl beds: from hence to the southward, the hills are composed of compact white limestone mixed with red sandstone and white marl. The dip observable on the road to Old Harbour varies, and shows that the strata undulate; the most prevalent is, however, to the southward, away from the trap. The small hill upon which the Rectory stands, near Old Harbour, is composed of white limestone.
Proceeding from the latter place to the Rectory of St. John's, we find the white limestone at Spring Garden Hill dipping at about an angle of 20° to the S.W. At Hollow Rock Hill it is mixed with red sandstone, and from thence to St. John's Rectory it is associated with red sandstone, and red marl traversed by numerous veins of whitish calcareous matter, the two latter rocks predominating. The compact white limestone is more abundant between St. John's Rectory and Mountain River estate, where it meets the trap: patches of it are however seen near the Barracks, after which it appears in considerable force on the descent into Luidas Vale: among the beds in the latter situation, there are some resembling those of Chapelton, principally composed of broken shells; these beds are also mixed with marls, and dip at about 45° to the S. The white limestone formation seems here much confused; in one place it dips slightly to the northward, and in another at from 10° to 15° to the S.W., so that it would be difficult from this section to say whether the limestone rests upon the trap or the latter forms a dyke amid the former.
By reference to the map, it will be seen that the limestone formation occurring in Manchester, Clarendon, Vere, and St. Dorothy, winds round the eastern extremity of the trappean district which separates the above-mentioned limestones from those of St. Ann's, &c. for a considerable distance: thus the white limestone on the north of St. John's becomes connected with that on the S.
Although it may seem out of place to notice fine scenery amid a dry detail of Geological facts, yet that traveller must be indeed dead to the beauties of Nature, who would not be struck with the fine and picturesque effect produced by the first burst of Luidas Vale, in his descent from the Barracks. This beautiful spot would be a lake but for the subterraneous channels the waters find for themselves: it is on every side surrounded by mountains, broken into a series of fine forms, and covered with forests, while the bottom of the Vale presents a mixture of buildings and cane-fields, the brilliant green of the latter contrasting finely with the other colours. The scenery of Jamaica is generally fine, varying from the beautiful to the grand, and such as can only be seen in the tropics; for there alone is found that vegetation, which gives such a peculiar character to the landscape.
The hills and mountains surrounding Luidas Vale are composed of white limestone, the strata of which have various dips: among the small hills on the north, the dip is gently to the S.E., while it will be found to the N. by E. at an angle of from 45° to 50° among the mountains that bound the Vale on the south, where the limestone joins the trap near Pleasant Hill. The same kind of limestones appear from beneath diluvium near Worthy Park estate, which is situated nearly in the centre of the Vale.
The principal subterraneous water passage of Luidas Vale is to the east of Thetford estate, where the river flows beneath a high mountain and re-appears on the other side of it, giving rise to the Black River (as it is denominated in Robertson's Maps) in St. Thomas-in-the-Vale. The waters lose themselves in many places in this vale, among others close to the works of Worthy Park, where the water, brought from a considerable distance, turns the great wheel and is swallowed up close to it.
It may here be remarked, that the white limestone formation of Jamaica is characterized by being hollowed into innumerable holes and caverns, among which the waters, which fall in the districts composed of it, are lost: hence arises the general scarcity of springs in that part of Jamaica principally composed of these rocks, and the necessity the inhabitants of such parts are under of making tanks to preserve a supply of water. The portions of country occupied by the white limestone formation are in a great measure shown upon a good map of Jamaica (Robertson's small map for instance) by a great want of rivers, while the latter are numerous in the districts composed of other rocks. Some rivers will be found to flow for a short distance and then sink, sometimes coming again to the surface and again sinking: several springs flow only for a very short space, being received into some cavity.
The white limestone of Luidas Vale is continued into the large parish of St. Ann, which seems almost wholly composed of rocks of this formation, presenting there a mixture of compact white limestones, earthy limestones, white marls, and beds of red sandstone. Many large casts of bivalves are found in this formation about a mile and a half from Green Park on the road to the Moneague. This parish affords many good sections, among which may be mentioned the cliffs between Ocho Rios Bay and the Roaring River
The St. Ann's limestone is continued into St. Mary's and St. Thomas-inthe-Vale; the space that it occupies will be best seen by reference to the map. In the former parish, besides the component parts of this formation which have been above enumerated, the shores present us with a rock composed of either white or flesh-coloured limestone, mixed with marl and containing an abundance of corals intermingled with shells; the former when broken having almost the appearance of recent specimens. I could not perceive that these beds were separated in any marked manner from the other white limestones, which they resemble in mineralogical composition: on the contrary, they seem to pass into them, and to form the upper part of the great white limestone formation of Jamaica.
These beds are observable on the coast in the vicinity of Ora Cabessa Bay, and constitute the point upon which Fort Haldane stands, the island opposite Port Maria, Pagee Point, and several small patches on the coast from the latter place to Forster's Cove, where the points on both sides are formed of them. They here dip at about 25° or 30° to the N., and are separated from the grauwacke by thick conglomerate beds, which also have the same dip: on the road up to a house on the western side of the cove, the corals are beautifully exposed. These beds are also found at Blowing Point, Don Christopher's Point, and in the vicinity of Jack's Bay: at the former places they are generally white and compact, sometimes of a flesh-colour, and do not contain so many corals as at the latter place, where the limestone forms a rising ground some little distance into the interior.
Between Palmetto Grove (St. Mary's) and Pimento Grove, and to the north of the trap rocks of the latter place, the lower marls of the white limestone formation are seen, containing some beds of compact grayish blue limestone. The high hill between Palmetto Grove and Tremolesworth also exposes the lower members of this formation, in which the marls are abundant. The continuation of this hill running to the N.W. appears formed of the same rocks.
Proceeding with the continuation of this formation into St. Thomas-in-theVale, we find the lower marls, which are sometimes schistose, in the vicinity of Pimento Grove, and on the southern side of the trap in that district: from hence to Rio Magno Pen the limestone will be observed in great abundance.
The hills on either side of Williamsfield and Sandy Gully estates, are formed of compact white limestone resting upon trap rocks; the strata, as before remarked, appearing to have been once continuous, and the whole looking like a valley of denudation.
The mountains that surround the great basin of St. Thomas-in-the-Vale are almost all composed of the white limestone formation ; and the basin itself would seem convertible into a large lake, if the ravine through which the Rio Cobre flows, called the Walks' Road, between the Bog Walk and Spanish Town, were stopped up.
Upon Mount Olive estate in this parish there is a singular natural bridge, formed of compact white limestone. A small river, flowing in a precipitous ravine, is crossed by a natural arch, beneath which it runs (see Plate XX.). This natural bridge is lofty, and of sufficient breadth at the top to permit a cart-road over it, which has accordingly been established. If it were not for the arch, the water would be blocked up by this natural wall or barrier, the cliffs rising high and precipitous on either side, and preventing its escape laterally. The cavernous nature of this limestone is curiously shown on the same property, by the manner in which the water is procured to turn the water-wheel. A rivulet runs on the side of the hill opposite to that on which the works are placed; and to obtain water for the mill, the rivulet is dammed up at a given place, when it finds its way through the hill, rushes out of a hole near the works, and turns the wheel.
The Walks' Road ravine exposes a good section of compact white limestone and white marl beds; the former are seen varying in thickness, and dipping to the S.W. or S.S.W., near the opening of the defile into the basin of St. Thomas-in-the-Vale.
The formation under consideration forms the mountains on the north of the diluvial and alluvial plain of St. Catherine's, and constitutes small hills rising out of it, close to Spanish Town, and on the road to Kingston. A white chalky marl is exposed on the same road between the former place and the Ferry. The Healthshire Hills, and the hill that rises above Port Henderson (opposite Port Royal) are also composed of the same rocks.
The mountains which join the elevated land of Stony Hill with those of St. Catherine's, and which bound the plain of Liguanea for a considerable distance on the north, belong to this formation. On the southern ascent to Stony Hill, compact white limestone, in some places associated with red sandstone, dips to the S. S. E. On the lower part of the descent from the same hill to the Agua Alta, light coloured marls and sands separate the great hody of this formation from the porphyritic conglomerate on which it rests.
The white limestone is continued but a short distance eastward from Stony Hill: I have however observed a small portion of it resting upon syenite near Somerset estate.
The Long Mountain situated to the N. E. of Kingston rises principally from beneath diluvial gravel, and is wholly formed of white limestone: the dip is difficult to trace, yet markings may here and there be observed, which would seem to make it probable that it is to the S.W. The most remarkable thing in this mountain is the salt, procured above a pen belonging to Mrs. Clark, sometimes in sufficient quantities to be used at table; it is found in a small recess, and appears to be derived from the evaporation of saline water which percolates through the marly limestone of the place.
From the Long Mountain this formation is continued into those of the Port Royal Mountains which approach the sea, and a good section is afforded of its beds up the valley of the Cane River to the Cascade. The white limestone is at first observed at the latter place in rather thin beds dipping to the N. E. at a highly inclined angle. Higher up the valley, the beds become thicker and dip to the S.W. at from 75° to 80°: near the falls the beds are almost perpendicular. From the various inclinations of the strata, they appear to have been much disturbed in this vicinity.
From the valley of the Cane River, a belt of the white limestone formation, varying in breadth, and separating the older rocks of the interior from the sea, runs round the coast from the South to the North side of the island by the East End, and passes through the parishes of St. David, St. Thoinas-in-theEast, Portland, and St. George's.
The lower part of the valley of the Yallahs River presents a good section of the St. David's portion. Ascending the river from Albion estate, compact white limestone beds are seen near Norris dipping to S.S.E. at about 40°; they will also be observed curved on the face of the cliffs, which for some distance up are formed of this rock on both sides the river. Approaching Mount Sinai estate, the lower beds of the formation are exhibited by the road side, and in a great measure correspond with those occurring near Chapelton (Clarendon), with the exception that the sands do not seem so abundant, whereas the marls are more so. Among the lower white limestone beds, which are slightly earthy and arenaceous, I found many organic remains, among them echinites (cidaris and spatangus), spines of echinites, ostreae, my«e, and cerithia; of the latter genus, besides a smaller species, I met with the gigantic one figured in Plate XXI. and which is also found in a similar situation at Chapelton. Beneath these beds there is a succession of gray and light coloured marls, among which I discovered fibrous gypsum, and thick beds of compact gray blue limestone; the whole resting upon porphyritic conglomerate near Mount Sinai.
White limestone beds, from one foot to three feet in thickness, have a curved dip to the S.S.E., between Norris and Lloyds upon Vavasers River. Marl, limestone, and slaty beds of the lower part of this formation are seen from the latter place up the valley of the Back River to the ridge that descends from Yallahs Hill, and separates St. David's from St. Thomas-in-the-East. This connecting ridge, or col as it would be called in Savoy or the French Alps, occurs between the Petersfield and Back rivers, and presents a mixture of white marl, brown sandstone, slate clay, and gray marl, with gray and white limestones, in beds nearly vertical, having a direction about N.E. and S.W. Yellowish sandstone should also be added to this list.
The white limestone formation of St. Thomas-in-the-East comes close up to the submedial country between Spring Garden and Bath; and, between the former place and Whitehall estate, upon the Plantain Garden River, white limestone associated with red marly sandstone rests upon argillaceous slate. The low hills on the south of Plantain Garden River between Whitehall and Sunning Hill are composed of white sandstone and marl mixed with reddish sandstone. Beds of gravel and coarse sandstone are found near Golden Valley, the relations of which to the rocks of the surrounding country I did not clearly ascertain, but they seem to occur beneath the white limestone formation.
The low hills extending to the sea on the south of Bath are composed of the white chalky marl portion of this formation, and might easily be mistaken for some varieties of chalk. These hills, which reach to the Great Morass near Morant Point, are separated from the white limestone on the north of Plantain Garden River by the diluvial and alluvial plain (rich in sugar estates) which extends from the mouth of the river to beyond Bath, and most probably conceals the junction of the limestone on the south with that on the north.
The white limestone that forms the coast from the north of Wheelersfield, Hordleys, Amity Hall, and Holland estates round the North-east Point to Port Antonio, presents an association of compact white limestone and white marl, mixed occasionally with some red. At Manchioneal Harbour the white marl contains corals, spines of Echinites, and Terebratulae, besides casts of other shells. Throughout the whole of this coast the white marl is the predominating member of the formation; and most of the low points, which are numerous, contain an abundance of corals, which have almost a recent appearance when fractured, resembling those formerly mentioned as occurring at Forster's Cove (St. Mary's). The dip of this limestone and marl is either E., N.E., or N.N.E., according to its bearing with the interior of this part of the island round which it mantles.
On the eastern side of Turtle Crawle Bay a sandy and chalky rock is worked for building-stones, which are used at Port Antonio; the white limestones and marls of which latter place rest upon porphyry.
From Port Antonio to Burlington (near the mouth of the Rio Grande) the coast is formed of white limestone and marl, the latter being sometimes sandy; the beds of the former dipping northerly at the cliffs near the ford over the Rio Grande.
Good sections are afforded of this formation in St. George's by the Swift, Great Spanish, and Buff Bay rivers. It extends up the former to Eden estate; and both sides of the river present fine cliffs of the rocks under consideration. The white limestones extend up the Great Spanish River to about half a mile or more above Skibo, the beds varying in thickness, and being contorted near the latter place. The road from Canewood to Low Layton estate, between the mouths of the Swift and Great Spanish rivers, is upon white sandy marl and limestone; but to the northward of Lennox, and rising above Low Layton the country is composed of volcanic rocks.
This formation continues up the Buff Bay River for about a mile above Charles Town, the beds varying in thickness and dipping northerly, being however curved in some places. The hills that back the low flat, between Annotto Bay and Buff Bay are composed of white limestones and marls; the extent of country occupied by them between the sea and the older rocks gradually becoming narrower as we approach the former place. In one spot between these two villages, I found nodules of chert in the white marl, from which circumstance it appears probable that the loose pieces of chert scattered over the surface in some parts of St. Mary's parish, as for instance in the neighbourhood of Islington estate, and in the diluvial soil between Unity and Non-Such estates and Port Maria, may have been derived from the destruction of some beds of the white limestone formation: and this supposition is rendered more probable by finding pieces of compact white limestone scattered over the surface of the submedial or transition country between NonSuch estate and Port Maria.
Savannah Conglomerate and Sandstone. 
Next in order to the white limestone formation may be mentioned a sandstone and a conglomerate that rest upon it, and which I have named as above because I have most frequently seen them among Savannahs. These rocks will be found at the base of the Mocho Mountains (Clarendon), forming the commencement of the large plain of Lower Clarendon and Vere; St. Jago's Savannah, extending to these mountains, is principally composed of the sandstone, which is light coloured and friable. From hence the sandstone and conglomerate sweep round by Burnt Savannah to Halse Hall and Hays Savannahs, skirting the white limestone hills and separating them from Diluvium and Alluvium.
At Halse Hall the conglomerate is composed of rounded pieces of various porphyries and trap rocks, cemented by a dirty white argillaceous substance, and mixed with carnelians, agates, chalcedonies, onyxes, and jaspers. The latter minerals are by no means rare in the conglomerate hill to the south of Halse Hall works (Clarendon).
In the water-courses among the above-mentioned savannahs there is an abundance of magnetic iron sand: this mineral is indeed common in several parts of Jamaica, but not so much so, I think, as among the savannah sandstones and conglomerates.
The same sandstones and conglomerates will be observed resting upon the white limestone formation in several places on the road from Halse Hall to Old Harbour. These rocks occur in other parts of Jamaica, but in no great abundance in that portion which I have selected for description.
Diluvium and Alluvium. 
It is gratifying to find Professor Buckland's distinctions so well borne out in a country far removed from those places where they were originally made; and to see that the same cause, which broke up the surface of European countries, reducing its harder portions into gravel, has also affected Jamaica in a similar manner. The divisions into Diluvium and Alluvium are too well known to require any notice here: I shall therefore proceed to describe those places in Jamaica, where I have observed them.
The first district which I shall notice is the great plain of Liguanea, upon the lower part of which Kingston is situated. This plain presents an inclined surface, falling gradually from a height of about 700 feet, which it attains where it abuts against the mountains that bound it on the north. It is almost wholly composed of diluvial gravel, consisting principally of the detritus of the St. Andrew's and Port Royal mountains, and evidently produced by causes not now in action, but derived from those mountains in the same manner and probably at the same period with the numerous tracts of European gravel which have resulted from the partial destruction of European rocks. The mountains which bound this plain are composed of white limestone, porphyry, syenite, greenstone, red porphyritic conglomerate, and siliceous sandstones, with red sandstones and conglomerates of an older date. Rounded pieces of all these rocks, those of the first being, however, very rare, form the diluvial gravel of Liguanea, which has resulted from their partial destruction. Though the pebbles are not in general of great size, there are some large blocks of siliceous sandstone among them near the Hope estate, and I have seen boulders of greenstone near the base of the Long Mountain.
The Hope River, with the Mammee River which falls into it, drains a considerable portion of the St. Andrew's Mountains, and loses itself, when the waters are low, among the Liguanea gravels, where the latter meet the solid strata of the mountains; but when swollen by heavy tropical rains, the river rushes with considerable force through the defile near the Hope Tavern, and traverses the gravel plain, which it has cut to a considerable depth: so that in fact the causes now in action tend to destroy the diluvial gravel plain of Liguanea rather than add to it. The section of these gravels, which the river has formed by cutting its bed, cannot be less than from 200 to 300 feet in depth near the Hope Tavern.
Proceeding up the Hope Valley, a part of the road displays a portion of diluvium (the rounded pieces of rock in which are large) resting upon a projecting portion or shoulder of the mountain, which rises high above the river.
In addition to the Hope River, numerous gullies formed by heavy tropical rains cut the diluvial plain of Liguanea in various directions, so that every stream that traverses it, tends to destroy it.
This plain descending gradually into the sea, and being in a great measure defended from the ravages of the latter by the Palisades (a sand-bank that extends several miles, and joins the town of Port Royal with the main land), alluvial matter is deposited in some parts of the shore, more particularly between Kingston and Port Henderson, where mangrove trees are numerous. These trees are particularly well calculated for the formation of alluvium, their long stilt-like roots collecting mud and other matters together, and protecting what they have accumulated from any sudden rush of water.
The diluvial plain of Liguanea is continued westward through the lowlands of St. Catherine's and St. Dorothy's; sands and clays are more abundant in these districts, but in other respects the diluvium is the same. The sections afforded by the rivers and gullies are of considerable interest, though there is no one so deep as that of the Hope River.
Bones of the elephant, rhinoceros, &c. have certainly not yet been discovered in the Jamaica gravels: but it should be recollected that the opportunities for such discoveries are by no means so common as in those countries where gravel is extensively used for roads, &c. The climate, moreover, is such that few feel tempted to risk their health by prosecuting researches of this nature. The large plain of Vere and Lower Clarendon is separated from the above by the low range of white limestone hills formerly mentioned. It is surrounded by white limestone hills and mountains on all sides save on the south and south-east, where it is washed by the sea, with the exception of that portion protected by Portland Ridge. The greater part of this plain is diluvial, consisting of gravels, clays, and sands; the former are principally composed of porphyry, greenstone, and other trap rock pebbles, that would appear to have been in a great measure derived from the partial destruction of the trap districts among the St. John's and Clarendon mountains.
Many good sections are afforded of this diluvium by the Rio Minho, which traverses it nearly through its whole length, as also by many deep gullies; it is easy to remark here, as in Liguanea, that the causes now m action tend to destroy this plain, and are altogether inadequate to its formation.
It is remarkable, that, though the diluvium of this district is nearly surrounded by white limestone hills and mountains, very few fragments of this rock are found in it; from which circumstance it would appear that the limestones, though in general tolerably compact, were unable to resist the effects of violent attrition so well as the greenstones, porphyries, &c. The Vere and Clarendon diluvium rests for some distance upon the Savannah sandstones and conglomerates before mentioned, and it is often very difficult to distinguish between them.
Diluvium occurs at the bottom of Luidas Vale, and in some parts of St. Thomas-in-the-Vale; and, mixed with alluvium, it forms a considerable tract of low land between Annotto and Buff bays. As might be expected the mouths of the rivers are alluvial, but some of the country about Welsh Woman's Point, and Whydah Bay, between the Rio Grande and Daniel's River (Portland), appears to be diluvial, as may also be part of the gravels occurring in the plain from Bath (St. Thomas-in-the-East) to the sea. Through this plain the Plantain Garden River flows. Most of the gravels in the neighbourhood of Serge Island estate (St. Thomas-in-the-East) seem also to belong to the same epoch of formation.
As connected with the subject, it may be as well to notice the valleys of the white limestone formation, which completely oppose themselves to the theory that valleys have been formed by the waters now flowing in them; for no waters flow in the greater part of those hollowed out of this formation, the limestone being, as before mentioned, extremely cavernous, and the rains that fall being speedily swallowed up in it: yet these valleys are, as to form, like most other valleys, and probably owe their origin to the same causes which have produced the greater part of those in the chalk- oolites, &c. of England, at the period when diluvial gravel was formed.
In Jamaica, where so many caverns exist, ample opportunities are without doubt afforded of seeing whether or not they contain the remains of animals that existed before the diluvial or great gravel period. Of the larger caverns I only visited two, one in Luidas Vale, and the other in Portland Ridge (Vere).
The first is situated near Swansea estate, and winds considerably; the bottom is in some places formed of clay, but I have not heard that any bones have ever been found in it. The second, or Portland Cave, reminded me of Professor Buckland's cave sections in one place, where a crust of stalagmite covers silty clay; but whether or not the latter contains bones I could not ascertain, from the want of the necessary implements. How far this stalagmitic crust (which is of some thickness) formerly extended, it would be difficult to say; hundreds of people having visited this cavern, as their names, scrawled upon the wall with charcoal, testify, and the floor in consequence, as may be reasonably inferred, not presenting the same appearance as when the cavern was first entered. The cave is situated on the side of a hill, within a short distance from the sea; but it is sufficiently elevated to prevent the possibility of the clay having been derived from the sea at its present level.
VOLCANIC ROCKS. 
In that part of Jamaica which 1 examined, I observed rocks of this character only at the Black Hill, which is situated between Lennox, Low Layton, and the sea (St. George's). This hill, when viewed from the neighbourhood of Buff Bay, has a somewhat conical appearance, and rises above the low hills that extend towards Savannah Point: the hill, however, when approached is seen to be no cone, notwithstanding its effect at a distance.
The rock, of which the Black Hill is principally composed, is grayish brown and hard, gives out an earthy smell when breathed on, and may in general terms be described as a volcanic amygdaloid, the cells, with which it abounds, being mostly filled: those, however, which have been exposed to the weather are frequently empty, as are also those within a few inches from the surface. The interior of the empty cells is often incrusted with a little oxyd of iron, while those that are full, and convert the rock into an amygdaloid, contain chalcedony, carbonate of lime, and occasionally some of the zeolitic minerals: in general, chalcedony lines the cavity, and the central part is composed of carbonate of lime. This rock, when the cells are empty, has a very lava-like appearance, and the greater part of it which is exposed is arranged in concretions reminding the observer of the porphyry at Pimento Grove. These concretions are separated from each other by a white argillaceous substance, which is in considerable abundance in one or two places. On ascending the hill it becomes more rare, or at least is not so easily seen as on the coast, where cliffs of volcanic amygdaloid rise above the sea.
Near the summit of the Black Hill I found the rock changed in several places into a substance between obsidian and pumice, having however more the character of the latter than of the former, and presenting every appearance of having been subjected to the action of fire at no very distant period (geologically speaking). I also found some pieces of rock, changed on the surface into this kind of obsidian-pumice, which in the interior were claystone porphyries, having a dark coloured base with white crystals of felspar.
The connexion of this hill with the sandy marl member of the white limestone formation, which surrounds it on all sides but that of the sea, is very obscure: some gravel beds will however be observed close to it, as it is approached from the mouth of the Swift River.
The Black Hill would seem referrible to what are commonly called extinct volcanos. How many more of them there may be in Jamaica, I had no means of ascertaining, though probably others may exist, more particularly in the western portion of the island, respecting the geology of which I could obtain little or no information, except that the white limestone is very com mon.
Explanation of the Sections. (Plate XIX.) In the preceding pages I have given little more than a detailed account of the composition of the Jamaica rocks, and the extent of country occupied by them, touching but slightly on the sections which show their relative positions, conceiving that these would be better thrown together, after the composition of the formations had been described.
Commencing then with the section from Kingston over St. George's Gap to Buff Bay (Plate XIX. fig. 1.), we find the Liguanea diluvium forming an inclined plane from Kingston to the base of the mountains on the north of Somerset estate, where a few patches of compact white limestone separate it from the syenite.
Ascending towards St. George's Gap, the lower mountains are found to be formed of syenite for some distance; to this succeeds a conglomerate composed of porphyry and other trap rock pebbles, having a brownish red argillaceous cement, and occurring in beds of various thickness. The dip being southerly, the conglomerate has the appearance of supporting the syenite. In one or two places I observed greenstone associated with the conglomerate: and beneath the latter there is a light coloured sandstone, similar to that found near the coal measures on the Hope River. This is succeeded by the red sandstones and conglomerates, which may in some measure be considered as equivalent to our old red sandstone: they dip S.W. near the summit of the Gap. Upon the northern descent from this place there are beds very mucli resembling those of the southern side; but these latter red sandstones and conglomerates are associated with grauwacke and dip to the N.E. From hence passing down the valley of the Buff Bay River, we find that all the rocks dip more or less to the northward, while those on the south of the Gap dip more or less to the southward.
The submedial or transition country, which comes in to the northward of St. George's Gap, continues nearly to Charles Town, and is composed of the rocks enumerated under the proper head. Approaching the town the grauwacke passes into red sandstone and conglomerate, and the latter support the white limestone formation which extends nearly to the sea.
The section from the sea near Kingston by Half Way Tree, Stony Hill Barracks, and Scot's Hall (Maroon Town), to Forster's Cove (St. Mary's), (Plate XIX. fig. 2.) exposes nearly the same rocks as the above. The diluvial gravel abuts against the base of Stony Hill, which is composed of the white limestone formation, dipping to the southward. This limestone is separated from the porphyritic conglomerate upon which it rests, by light coloured sands and marls, as may be observed on the descent to the Agua Alta, or Wag Water. These are succeeded by a great mass of various trap rocks, among which I here and there observed (in the bed of the Agua Alta) some conglomerate beds, composed of trappean pebbles cemented by a trappean substance. This trap seems to rest upon the red sandstone and conglomerate beds, that pass into grauwacke to the northward of Scot's Hall (Maroon Town).
From thence grauwacke continues across St. Mary's parish to the sea near Forster's Cove, where some of the upper beds of the white limestone formation rest upon it.
The section from Old Harbour to Luidas Vale (fig. 3.) shows the connexion of the trap mountains in St. John's with the white limestone formation on the north and south of it. The alluvial and diluvial plain of St. Dorothy's continues to the base of the white limestone hills near the Rectory, which is itself situated upon a small white limestone hill, that rises out of the plain. The white limestone dips southerly, and continues to Wood Hall estate, where it dips from, and apparently rests on, the trap. The latter afterwards forms the mountains to Mount Pleasant, situated on the mountain that rises to the south of Luidas Vale: here the white limestone again comes in, and rests upon trap rocks. The beds now, however, dip at a considerable angle to the north, appearing as if they were forced up into their present position by the trap; and a glance at the section will show that the trap has very much the appearance of having been protruded through the white limestone formation, which, it will be seen, returns to its southerly dip on the north side of Luidas Vale. The limestone may have been deposited on the trap, though it is somewhat difficult to conceive how strata, inclined like those between Mount Pleasant and Luidas Vale, could have been formed by deposition from a fluid. Geologists are well aware how difficult it is to refer trap rocks to any particular epoch of formation; I have therefore not attempted to make any distinctions in this respect between the trap of the St. John's Mountains and that extending through the parishes of Port Royal and St. Andrew's, into St. Mary's: in fact, the trap rocks of the two districts very nearly resemble each other; and, in both cases, appear from beneath the white limestone formation.
The next section to be noticed is that from the sea, over the Long Mountain, and up the valley of the Hope River, to Catherine's Peak (fig. 4.). A sand-bank (the Palisades) protects the branch of the sea forming Kingston Harbour, on the north of which (in our line of section) rises the Long Mountain, composed of white limestone dipping southerly, and separated by a little diluvium from the sea. Between the Long Mountain and the mountain on the north of the Hope estate we meet with part of the diluvium of the Liguanea plain. This abuts against the porphyritic conglomerate, which forms the gorge of the Hope River Valley near the Hope Tavern, and is continued up the valley to nearly opposite the Botanical Garden, where the rocks which I have described as resembling coal-measures occur beneath it. To these succeed a red and gray conglomerate mixed with light coloured sandstones, among which a compact gray limestone is found, very much resembling the carboniferous limestone of the English series. Beneath these are the red sandstones and conglomerates which I have stated may be equivalent to our old red sandstones.
The rocks of the summit of Catherine's Peak, upon which the above rest, seem to be submedial or transition, and are formed of argillaceous slate, limestone, and gray sandstones: these dip northerly, as may be seen near Clifton (4228 feet above the sea) and the northern side of Catherine's Peak.
Comparison of the Jamaica Rocks with those described by M. von Humboldt in Mexico and South America which appear to resemble them. 
Transition or Submedial Rocks.—The Jamaica rocks of this class can be said very little to resemble those described as occurring in Quito and Peru by Humboldt in his "Essai sur le Gisement des Roches dans les Deux Hemispheres," wherein he states that an immense formation of transition porphyry replaces the grauwacke in those places, and that it is associated with syenite and greenstone. We have seen under the head of trap rocks associated with the Jamaica submedial or transition rocks, that porphyries, syenites, greenstones, &c. are by no means rare on the southern side of the Blue Mountain Range: but these rocks do not replace the grauwacke, on the contrary they are associated with it; and, taking into consideration the mass of the Jamaica transition rocks, the grauwacke and limestones are much more abundant than the trap.
The transition rocks of Mexico, which Humboldt has classed under his group 3, and which he composes of transition slate containing grauwacke, greenstone, dark coloured limestones, syenites, and porphyries, would seem more to resemble the Jamaica transition rocks, for the latter might be classed in this division.
Red-sandstone (gres rouge). The rocks which I have described as red sandstone and conglomerate, coal-measures, and porphyritic conglomerate, porphyries or other trap rocks being associated with the latter, seem analogous to the gres rouge and porphyre secondaire, which Humboldt describes as occurring in several parts of Mexico and South America, and which he classes together as one formation. Commencing with New Spain, he informs us that the schists and transition porphyries of Guanaxuato (platform of Anahuac) are covered by a formation of red sandstone, that it forms the plains of Celaya, Salamanca, and Burras, and that it supports a limestone resembling that of the Jura. He observes that in the older beds (mine de Rayas) he thought he observed a passage from red sandstone into grauwacke: this kind of passage it will be recollected, I have noticed in two or three places in Jamaica. It is stated, that in the red sandstone of Guanaxuato, the cement is so abundant (road from Guanaxuato to Rayas and to Salgado)that the embedded fragments can no longer be distinguished. Argillaceous beds, from 3 to 4 toises thick, are there seen to alternate with the coarse conglomerate: an alternation of argillaceous beds also takes place with the red conglomerates of Jamaica (Valley of the Hope River, &c). M. Humboldt mentions that he did not observe any traces of coal, or fossil wood, in the red sandstone of Guanaxuato, but that these substances are frequently found in other parts of New Spain.
Under the head of Venezuela, it is stated that the immense plains of Venezuela (Llanos of the Low Oronoco) are in great part covered by red sandstone, that the red sandstone is disposed in concave strata between the mountains of the Caracas' coast and those of Upper Oronoco; and that it rests on the north on transition slate, and on the south on granite. This arenaceous formation is covered (Tisnao) by a whitish gray compact limestone, resembling that of the Jura.
In New Grenada an extensive sandstone formation, which M. Humboldt considers to be gres rouge, covers nearly without interruption, not only the northern plains of New Grenada, between Mompox, the canal of Mahates, and the mountains of Tolu and Maria, but also the basin of the Rio de la Magdalena (between Teneriffe and Melgar), and that of the Rio Cauca (between Carthago and Cali). Some scattered fragments of schistose coal grit, which he found at the mouth of the Rio Sinu (to the E. of the Gulf of Darien), lead him to think it probable that this formation extends even towards the Rio Atrato and the Isthmus of Panama. It rises to considerable height on the eastern branches of the Cordillera (Paramos de Chingasa and de Suma Paz), and on the western in the mountains between the basin of the Rio Cauca and the Platiniferous district of Choco. It is stated that this sandstone of New Granada may be traced, without losing sight of it, from the Valley of the Rio Magdalena (Honda, Melgar,) by Pandi to the platform of Santa-Fe de Bogota.
M. Humboldt informs us, that in the southern hemisphere, the Cordilleras of Quito presented him with the most extensive formation of gres rouge that he had yet observed. This rock covers, at the height of 1300 and 1500 toises above the sea, the whole plateau of Tarqui and Cuenca; it rises in the Paramo de Sarar to the height of 1900 toises, and the thickness of its entire mass exceeds 800 toises.
The Cuenca formation of gres rouge is found in Peru, at the great plateau of Caxamarca. 
From the above it appears that the gres rouge of M. Humboldt forms a considerable part of that portion of the American continent which was visited by him, and that it there constitutes a formation of very considerable thickness: it is therefore by no means surprising that we should find it in Jamaica also of considerable thickness, (Valley of the Hope River, &c.) and it is by no means improbable that it may also be found in the islands of Cuba and Hayti.
The Mexican red sandstone is staled to present the most striking resemblance to the Rothe todle liegende of Mansfield, to contain angular pieces of Lydian stone, syenite, porphyry, quartz, and hornstone. The cement uniting these fragments is argillo-ferruginous, very tenacious, yellowish brown and often brick red.
This Venezuela grds rouge is represented to be a conglomerate, containing rounded fragments of quartz, Lydian stone, and flinty slate, united by an argillo-ferruginous cement, of an olive brown colour, and extremely tenacious. The large-grained conglomerate alternates with a very fine-grained sandstone (Mesa de Paja).
The New Grenada rock is composed of alternating beds of small-grained quartzose and schistose sandstone, with conglomerates containing angular fragments (from 2 to 3 inches in breadth) of Lydian stone, clay-slate, gneiss, and quartz (Honda, Espinal). The cement is argillaceous and ferruginous, sometimes siliceous, and the colours of the rock vary from yellow gray to brownish red.
The gres rouge of the Quito plateau is stated to be coloured by iron, it is generally very argillaceous, with small grains of quartz; it is sometimes schistose, and alternates, as in Thuringia, with a conglomerate containing fragments of porphyry, three, five, and even nine inches in diameter. Clay bed9 are found in this formation, sometimes brown, at others white and steatitic, passing into the claystones of the red sandstone porphyries.
From this description of the American grks rouge, it will be found to correspond, as nearly as could, from the distances, be expected, with the red sandstones and conglomerates, coal measures and porphyritic conglomerates of Jamaica. Porphyritic pebbles are it would appear more abundant in the Jamaica conglomerates than in those of the opposite continent: this is however a difference of no great importance, as the fragments found in this class of rocks are generally derived from the older rocks of the districts in which they occur.
White limestone formation.—This formation is much more difficult to identify with M. Humboldt's description of American rocks than the preceding. I am however inclined to consider some of the limestones which M. Humboldt refers to the Jura limestone (oolite formation) as analogous to the Jamaica white limestone, the compact beds of which, as I have before stated, very much resemble those of the Jura in mineralogical structure; and I am the more inclined to adopt this opinion as M. Humboldt does not mention that he found any characteristic fossils in the Jura-looking limestones of America, which might lead us to conclude that the formations were distinct. He states that he observed many whitish limestones, in part lithographic, in the equinoctial zone of America. These limestones occur at the cavern of Caripe (on the S. E. of Cumana); on the coast of New Barcelona (Venezuela); at the island of Cuba (between the Havanna and Batabano, and between La Trinidad and the Boca del Rio Guarabo); and among the central mountains of Mexico (plains of Salamanca, and defile of Batas). The limestone formation of the New Barcelona coast contains thin beds of hornstone passing into flinty slate, a circumstance also observable at Zacatecas in Mexico. This is somewhat analogous to the nodules of chert contained in the white marl of the white limestone formation between Annotto Bay and Buff Bay.
M. Humboldt says: "in the vast steppes of Venezuela, near Tisnao, the grte rouge supports, as it appeared to me, a lithographic limestone analogous to the Jura limestone. This also occurs in Mexico, in the plains of Temascatio, to the south-west of Guanaxuato. At the northern extremity of the valley of Mexico (between the Hacienda del Salto, Batas, and Puerto de Reyes) a grayish blue limestone formation, containing gypsum, and supporting a calcareous breccia, appeared to me to belong to the Jura limestone, notwithstanding the proximity of the tertiary marls (Desague de Huehuetoque,) among which the bones of fossil elephants are found." This Jura-looking limestone is also mentioned as occurring at the Caymana islands. While sailing close to the south-eastern shore of Cuba for some distance, I observed that the mountains presented white cliffs precisely resembling those of the white limestone of Jamaica. Should these Jura-looking limestone rocks turn out to be of the same age with the Jamaica white limestones, the latter would appear to have been extensively deposited in this part of the world. That it was so, is by no means improbable; for the Jamaica white limestone formation does not consist of a few thin beds, which might have belonged to a small local deposit, but constitutes an extensive formation, which cannot be less in some places than from 2000 to 3000 feet thick.
In addition to the above rocks which M. Humboldt refers to the Jura limestone, he states, that the hills which skirt the Cordillera of Venezuela in some places by the sea side (Castillo de San Antonio de Cumana, Cerro del Barigon in the Peninsula of Araya, &c.) appeared to him to belong to the calcaire grossier. The beds however which he mentions as composing these hills do not agree with the Jamaica rocks, with the exception of the whitish gray compact and arenaceous limestone, which contains madrepores, cardita?, ostreae, and turbines, and is mixed with large grains of quartz. This last circumstance is not indeed common in Jamaica, but I have observed at Halse Hall a whitish gray calcareous rock, mixed with grains of quartz, resting upon the white limestone, but seeming connected with it.
The very limited extent of country in which I observed volcanic rocks in Jamaica, will render it useless to attempt any comparison with similar rocks on the neighbouring continent. It may however be as well to state that I did not find any trachyte which would seem so abundant in South America.
