XII.—Notices and Extracts from the Minute-Book of the Geological Society. 
—On the Iron-Sand Formation of Sussex. By Gideon Mantell, Esq. F.R. , L., and G. S.S. In a Letter to Dr. Fitton, Secretary of the Geological Society. [Read June 14th, 1822.]
A SHORT time since I had the honour of presenting to the Society a series of specimens, illustrative of the physical characters and organic remains of the strata of Tilgate Forest. I now submit to its notice some additional examples of the fossils of those deposits, and beg to offer some further observations on their geological position and relations.
In my work on the Geology of Sussex, I have mentioned the difficulties which attended the determination of their geognostic position, and the reasons which led me to consider them as related to the Purbeck limestone; but a more accurate survey of the district in which they occur, made in company with my friend Charles Lyell, Esq., Sec. G.S., &c. has enabled me to ascertain that such an opinion is not tenable, and that these strata may with greater propriety be associated with the subordinate beds of limestone, sandstone, and clay, which, in certain parts of Sussex, alternate in the iron-sand formation.
In the present state of our knowledge, it may be convenient to separate the strata under consideration into two divisions; comprising in the first the Ashburnham limestone, and in the second, the strata of Tilgate Forest, as in the following tabular arrangement.
The strata of the first division (the Ashburnham limestone) have been so fully described in my work, entitled Illustrations of the Geology of Sussex, that it is unnecessary in this brief notice to do more than refer to the account alluded to. These beds underlie the strata of Tilgate Forest, and perhaps may hereafter be ranked with the Purbeck limestone, which in some respects they resemble. The sandstone, &c. of Tilgate Forest are so well characterized by their remarkable fossils, that their existence in remote localities is easily determined. In every quarry where these beds are exposed, their organic remains have been discovered more or less frequently.
Mr. Webster, in 1813, noticed beds of sandstone with intervening layers of clay and sand, in the cliffs at Hastings, and discovered in them the bones, teeth, and other remains of animals and numerous vegetables. The vegetables allied to the Cycas, so commonly found at Tilgate Forest, are also of frequent occurrence in the sandstone of Hastings; large rolled portions of them are constantly seen on the shore, which have been washed out of the cliffs and thrown up by the waves. At Rye and Winchelsea, strata of a similar character have been observed by Mr. Lyell, who informs me, "that the rock on which the latter town is situated, rising from beneath the alluvial marsh by which it is surrounded, presents cliffs more or less abrupt towards every point of the compass. In a quarry on the road-side, near the ancient gateway leading to Rye, the strata are distinctly exposed. The summit and base of the pit consist of sand with layers of friable sandstone; and in the centre a stratum of limestone occurs 5 feet thick. In the cliffs, considerably below the level of the base of the quarry, another bed of limestone is seen imbedded in the ironsand, thus clearly proving the alternation of these deposits. The flat slabs of the limestone of Winchelsea, where weather-worn, exhibit casts of small bivalves, which also appear in the intervening layers of sandstone. Rye, like Winchelsea, is built upon a hillock of the iron-sand formation, containing beds of calciferous sandstone."
In tracing the Tilgate strata in their course westward, in the direction of a line drawn from Hastings to Framfield, and from thence to Horsham, we find them exposed in several quarries, which have been opened for repairing the roads and other economical purposes; but the surface exposed is too inconsiderable to afford any decisive information respecting their geological position. Chailey, Linfield, Cuckfield, St. Leonards and Tilgate Forests, may be mentioned as the most interesting localities.
Still further to the west the strata are exposed to a considerable extent in the vicinity of Horsham. Mr. Lyell has favoured me with the following section and description of a quarry at Stammerham, near that town.
"In the calciferous sandstone, No. 10, according to the report of the workmen, the bone of an animal was discovered some years since: organic remains, however, appear to be rare. No shells occur; but branches of vegetables in a carbonized state are often met with. The quarry at Tower Hill, near Stammerham, so nearly resembles the latter, that it is unnecessary to describe it. Near this an incrusting spring rises, which covers the vegetables in the ditches through which it flows, with calcareous tufa.
In the quarries at Sedgwick, 2 miles from Stammerham, Mr. Lyell observed a large quantity of slabs of paving-stone, many of which were deeply furrowed on both sides. This appearance is common in the sandstone throughout Sussex, and appears to have been formed by the advance and retrocession of the waves.
The dip of the strata near Horsham is very variable: in some instances it takes place in every direction; in others, the beds are nearly horizontal, and are worked over a considerable area without descending deeper."
Mr. Lyell remarks in the same letter, "that upon examining the collection of the Geological Society, he has found, among the specimens from Battle, one which agrees with the calciferous sandstone of Tilgate Forest, and contains carbonized wood: and that among a series of specimens from the cliffs at Hastings, collected by Mr. Webster, which still more closely correspond with those of Tilgate Forest, there are the teeth of fishes and amphibia, and the rib of an animal, inclosed in the rock."
From the preceding observations we may, I think, fairly conclude, that the calciferous sandstone of Rye, Winchelsea, Hastings, Tilgate Forest, and Horsham, are but different portions of the same series of deposits, belonging to the iron-sand formation; the Ashburnham beds being situated beneath them.
The organic remains which I have now the honour to present to the Society, may be considered as characteristic of the strata of Tilgate Forest. They are as follow:

2.—Section of a Well sunk at Streatham Common, in the County of Surrey. By Mr. Thomas Yeats: in a Letter addressed to Brown Esq., Secretary to the Westminster Fire-Office; and by him communicated to the Geological Society. [Read April 2d, 1824.]
SlR, Streatham, December 19, 1823.
HAVING had the superintendence of sinking a well on Streatham Common to the depth of 100 feet, and of boring from the bottom of the well to the further depth of 185 feet, I herewith send you specimens of the various strata found in the progress of the work. The total depth of 285 feet is the greatest which has hitherto been pierced in this part of the country.
The London clay is here of considerable thickness, commencing almost immediately beneath the vegetable mould, and continuing to the depth of 180 feet, when it becomes strongly mixed with sand. The specimen of clay from the depth of 200 feet contains many fragments of shell, which have been broken exceedingly small by the auger. Of this clay I immersed considerable quantities in water, in the hope of finding a perfect shell; but without success. From what I have observed in the present sinking, as well as in other parts adjoining, this appears to me to be a stratum, nearly 30 feet thick, consisting principally of oyster-shells.
At the depth of 235 feet we pierced the spring, which has hitherto supplied this place with hard water. Up to this point we experienced no difficulties, but such as arose occasionally from hard substances, which we passed through by using the punch instead of the auger. The stratum of variegated clay, at the depth of 256 feet, was very troublesome; since after drawing the rods for the purpose of emptying the auger, it swelled again into the hole before they could be lowered. The hard rock, at the depth of 265 feet, caused great delay, the punch having been used three days before it could be perforated.
In the course of this work very few shells were found: in fact, the small quantity of earth brought up by the auger gave me no room to hope for many.
3.—Notice respecting the Quartz-rock of Bromsgrove Lickie. By Mr. James Yates, F.G.S. [Read June 7th and 21st, 1822.]
THE notice here offered to the consideration of the Society relates to the quartz-rock of Bromsgrove Lickie, described by Professor Buckland in the 2d part of the 5th volume of the Geological Transactions. A reference to the accompanying specimens will best explain the facts which I wish to mention.
No. 1. exhibits the usual appearance of the rock. It is a granular quartz, in which are imbedded rounded grains of quartz and of decomposing white felspar, with particles of black oxide of iron. This rock passes, on the one hand, into a coarse friable sandstone, in which the crystalline structure entirely disappears; and on the other, into a rock composed of minute quartz-crystals.
Nos. 2, 3, 4. show the gradation into sandstone, in which the particles of sand are held loosely together by ferruginous clay.
Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8. show the opposite gradation into a rock, also friable, containing in small quantity a cement of clay, but consisting almost wholly of minute quartz-crystals, not half a line in length, with brilliant faces and sharp angles, having the form of six-sided prisms terminated at each end by six-sided pyramids, and with the striae on the sides distinctly perceptible by the aid of a microscope. A circumstance still more remarkable in this variety of the rock is, that it contains impressions of shells. 1 observed this appearance in two different places: in both instances it was among the uppermost strata of the formation. No. 5. is from the western side of Rubery Hill, which belongs to the series of hills called by Mr. Buckland "the Lower Lickie Range." Nos. 6, 7, 8. are from the eastern side near Colmore's Farm, where a shaft has been dug to the depth of 40 or 50 yards in search of coal. Some of the usual beds belonging to the coal strata, such as clunch and peldon, were found in sinking this shaft. At a considerable depth there occurred a stratum of shell-limestone, of which No. 9. is a specimen. On sinking into the quartzrock, the water rose so rapidly that the work was abandoned. This quartzrock contains no trace of lime, and I have not seen any remains of the shells, but only the impressions, showing them to have been of the same kind with some of those in the superincumbent limestone. These shells appear to belong to the genus Anomia.
Mr. Buckland states, that it has been questioned, whether the quartz-rock before us is a primitive, or a transition rock. The impressions of shells may assist in settling this question, and in ascertaining the relation of the interesting rock, in which they occur, to the other English strata.
Besides the narrow defile through which the Birmingham road passes, when the rock dips to the south-west, I examined the rock at 5 or 6 other places, and found it sometimes dipping at a high angle in an opposite direction, and sometimes nearly horizontal.
4.—Notice respecting the Pebbles in the Bed of Clay which covers the New Red Sandstones in the S. W. of Lancashire. By Dr. Bostock. [Read March 31st, and June 6th, 1823.]
THE extensive deposit of new red sandstone, which occupies nearly the whole of the county of Chester and a part of that of Lancaster, at the S.W. angle of the latter county is for the most part covered by a mass of sandy clay. The colour of the clay is nearly that of the rock on which it rests; its different parts differ considerably in the proportion of its siliceous to its argillaceous matter; but although it is usually denominated a marl, and is employed in the neighbourhood for the improvement of the soil, it contains but a very small quantity of calcareous matter, and in many parts is entirely without it. It abounds in rounded pebbles of all sizes, from the most minute to masses of 3 feet or more in diameter, which are deposited through every part of it. The pebbles may be considered as about equally numerous in the upper and lower portions of the clay, and deposited in it without any kind of arrangement; but upon viewing an extensive section, certain parts are found to contain a greater number than others; in general the most argillaceous parts contain the fewest pebbles. The thickness of the clay partly depends upon the inclination of the upper surface of the rock on which it rests. On the N.E. bank of the Mersey, about 3 miles above Liverpool the clay in some parts presents a face of 30 or 40 feet in height, while those parts of the red sandstone which are in any considerable degree elevated above the ordinary level of the district, rise above the clay. Its upper surface is, however, far from being horizontal, although more nearly so than that of the rock. In some parts, where fissures in the sandstone have produced narrow valleys, or, as they are termed, dingles, the clay appears to be wanting; while, on the contrary, there are some knolls above the average level which are covered by it.
The upper portion of the bed of clay, for about 10 inches in depth, is obviously of a somewhat different nature from the great mass of it, being more sandy and of a lighter colour, and containing a great number of very small pebbles, although seldom any of the large ones. This upper stratum differs very materially from the rest of the mass in its agricultural character, being decidedly unfavourable to vegetation; it has obtained the provincial appellation of ravin. I have had frequent opportunities of verifying the accuracy of the remark, both from direct experiments, and from observations on the growth of plants, the roots of which had penetrated into this substance. The immediate cause of its injurious effects would appear, in part at least, to depend upon the tendency which it has to become indurated in dry and warm weather: under such circumstances it has been rendered so hard as to be incapable of being penetrated by a spade.
The existence of this upper stratum would seem to indicate, either that the whole of the clay was originally deposited in the way in which it now lies with respect to its upper surface, or that, after the great body of the clay had been deposited, and had experienced the action of various causes upon its surface, the "ravin" was deposited by a subsequent and independent operation.
The specimens now laid before the Society, were taken from the claybank mentioned above, and may afford an idea of the nature and variety of the rocks of which the pebbles are composed. It would not be easy to state the proportion which the pebbles bear to the clay in which they are imbedded; but they are so numerous, that, in the more sandy parts, a square yard of the elay would yield some dozens of them of sufficient size to be easily collected. In all cases, or at least with a very few exceptions, they exhibit marks of having undergone a great degree of attrition, their edges and angles being very much worn down. With respect to the proportion in which the different kinds of pebbles exist, perhaps the most frequent are clay-slate, greenstone, and basalt; the granitic are not uncommon, and some of the largest masses consist of this rock: quartz pebbles are also not unfrequent, but generally of small size. No decided organic remains have been observed in this clay; for although vegetable matter, and even what appears to be roots of plants, is occasionally found in it, these may have belonged to trees that have grown in the clay after it was deposited in its present situation. It is worthy of remark, that when the clay is exposed to the atmosphere, it frequently becomes clothed with a plentiful crop of the Tussilago Forfara; and this has been observed to be the case with portions of it that have been originally many feet below the surface of the earth.
5.—Extract of a Letter from Alexander Gordon, Esq. to D. Gordon, Esq., of Abergeldie, describing three successive Forests of Fir embedded in a Peat Moss ;—accompanied by Specimens. 
IT having been reported to me that the remains of distinct forests of fir timber, as large as any now growing in Braemar, were to be found in your moss of Auldguissack, I went yesterday to inspect it.
The moss from the lower part of the hill to the Muick or river, varies in depth from 18 inches to 10 feet and upwards, presenting an inclined plane in some places of rather uneven surface, and gradually elevated from the Muick to the bottom of the hill.
On digging into the moss in two different places, we discovered large roots of Scotch fir-trees, about one foot below the ordinary average level of the moss. Under the bottoms of these roots there was a stratum of about a foot and a half of moss, below which other roots or trunks of trees appeared; and on digging still further down (about 6 or 7 feet below the ordinary level of the moss), a third set of roots and truncated stems of trees were discovered; this lowermost set presenting the appearance of having been destroyed by fire, as the charcoal was quite distinct on them. It seemed impossible that these three series of roots could have supported different trees all growing at the same time, for the ramifications of each (horizontally, like Scotch firs at the present day,) are quite distinctly bedded in moss, and placed perpendicularly above each other. It is therefore clear, that these are the remains of three different forests of wood, which had grown in this hollow at different periods of antiquity.
A similar succession of three distinct series of roots of fir-trees, divided by interposed beds of root, is given by Mr. David Aher in vol. ii. of the Irish Bog Reports, page 61. PI. IV.
6.—Notice on Carbonate of Copper occurring in the Magnesian Limestone, at Newton Kyme, near Tadcaster. By W. Marshall, Esq., M.G.S. [Read May 20th, 1825.
THE accompanying specimens of green carbonate of copper were discovered by myself last spring in a large quarry of magnesian limestone, situated about half a mile south of Newton Kyme. The copper runs through the limestone in thin veins, dipping considerably to the west, which is also the dip of the limestone itself, but at a less angle than the copper.
That copper has been of frequent occurrence in this quarry is proved not only by the debris of the workings of later years, but also by the fact, that it is still to be found adhering to the stones in many of the oldest walls about Newton Kyme, the materials of which were taken out of this quarry.
At a small village called Farnham, about two miles north-west of Knaresborough, which is also upon the magnesian limestone, a considerable quantity of copper was formerly obtained by means of galleries worked through the limestone.
The copper, which appears to have been the green carbonate, was not only found investing the limestone, but also in small masses, seldom exceeding the size of a large potatoe.
The workings were abandoned, and the shafts (which were generally about 15 or 16 yards deep) filled up, in consequence of the great accumulation of water, which they ineffectually attempted to overcome by engines worked by horses; the disputes among the proprietors of the adjoining lands preventing them from driving a level to take away the water.
A small quantity was found so late as twenty years since, upon sinking a well through the limestone. None is ever found in the quarries now worked at Farnham.
These two are the only instances, I believe, where any of the ores of copper have been found occurring in the magnesian limestone of this country, and they appear to have escaped the notice of Geologists.
W. MARSHALL
