XIV.—Notice on the Geology of the Ponza Isles. 
BY G. POULETT SCROPE, ESQ. F.G.S. 
[Read April 23d, May 7th and 21st, 1824.]
ALL the islands that rise from the Mediterranean off the coast of Terracina and Gaieta are often designated as the Ponza Isles; from the name of the central and largest amongst them *.
It would be more correct, however, to consider the three most westerly isles, viz. Ponza, Palmarola, and Zannone, together with the minor insulated rocks that are scattered round them, as one group, and Ventotiene and San Stefano, which are separated from these by a considerable interval, very little less indeed than that which divides them on the other side from Ischia, as a second. These islands are all subject to the crown of Naples. Two only are permanently inhabited or in cultivation, Ponza and Ventotiene. The former has a small but deep and extremely secure port; though a number of half-concealed rocks and sunk ledges near its entrance render it dangerous of approach to vessels of burden unless with an experienced pilot. To the small craft that ply between Genoa and Naples, it affords an invaluable refuge in the rough and variable weather for which the Tuscan sea has been always notorious; and the more important from the perilous character of the whole western coast of Italy, which from Orbitello to Naples consists of a sandy shore, shoaling gradually to a great distance into the sea, upon which a current constantly setting towards the land produces a violent and destructive surf.
In fact a number of boats are annually lost upon this shore, which may be compared to the coast of Lincolnshire, or still more correctly to the low shore of Africa between Cape Blanc and the Canaries. Under such circumstances, the harbour of Ponza, situated in deep water, and at sufficient distance from the main coast to prevent risk in running for it, is probably the means of saving annually a very considerable number of vessels and lives. During one day that I was myself confined to the island by hard blowing weather, no less than fifteen vessels, occupied in different branches of the coasting trade, put in for shelter.
These islands were imperfectly described by Sir W. Hamilton in 1785, in the Philosophical Transactions. Dolomieu examined them in the subsequent year, and published his observations in considerable detail in his "Memoire sur les Isles Ponces." But, at that period, geological investigations were almost solely confined to the mineral characters of rocks, or to crude speculations upon their origin; very little attention being paid to their geognostical relations. Owing partly to this cause, and in a great measure to the changes that have since taken place in the nomenclature of the science, few fects of any importance are to be gleaned from the accounts of either writer; and consequently we find these islands unnoticed in most general works on geology: the vague descriptions of the French travellers being perhaps mistrusted, while no more definite or recent observations have been made public by any other geologist.
Still it was known from the account of Dolomieu and from the specimens brought by him to Paris, that these islands consist principally of trachyte, and contain some remarkable resinous and quartzose varieties of this rock, the relations of which became an object of geological interest. It was also known that the examination of them is facilitated by the constant degradation of their steep and naked cliffs, occasioned by their exposed situation in a boisterous sea of great depth, and the friable nature of many of their component rocks.
The few trachytic districts which have been as yet examined with attention, and according to the improved method of modern science, occur inland, and great difficulty has uniformly been experienced in every endeavour to ascertain the relative positions of the different varieties that compose them; a difficulty perhaps exaggerated by the prepossession for some favourite theory, but chiefly owing to the facility with which the rocks of this family yield to the wasting influence of the weather; in consequence of which their debris usually reach to so great a height against their escarpments, that few natural sections of any extensive surface are to be obtained. In traversing such inland districts the observations of the acutest geologist are almost necessarily limited to geographical data; the intervals between the knolls or protruding masses of different varieties being concealed by detritus. This is a source of peculiar obscurity among the trachytic formations, which, being unstratificd, give no indications, by the dip of their beds, of the relative positions of their discordant members. Vertical sections in this case are invaluable, and without them the geological observer is liable to be led into unavoidable and pernicious errors. So general indeed and fatal is this difficulty, that there still exist douhts in the minds of geologists of great experience, and who have had opportunities of examining more than one trachytic district, (but under the disadvantages to which I allude,) as to whether this rock ever occurs in absolute superposition to any other.
For these reasons the Ponza Isles, whose internal structure is completely laid open in the surfaces of their worn and skeleton forms, become objects of considerable interest, notwithstanding the comparative smallness of their extent. Such were the considerations which induced me to visit them in the beginning of May, 1822. I was on the whole very fortunate in weather, and was enabled by the calmness of the sea to explore almost every part of them at leisure, making the tour of each in a boat, and landing wherever it was judged necessary to examine more closely the composition of the cliffs by which they are invested.
This, the largest island of the group, has a very remarkable figure; of extreme length in comparison with its width. The former may be estimated at little more than four miles; its width is exceedingly unequal. The shores are eaten into numerous deep concavities, seemingly produced by the undermining action of t'le waves wherever the component rock was more friable than that of the intervening promontories. When these points of extreme erosion accidentally correspond on either side, the island is very nearly divided by the junction of the two opposite coves. This occurs to a remarkable degree on two different points of the island's length, in which its transverse d'ameter does not exceed a few hundred feet. It is probable that in no great length of time a complete separation will be effected on both these spots; one of which is the narrow strip of land that divides the cove called Chiaja di Luna from the harbour of Ponza; the other, a still narrower ridge which backs the Cala d'lnferno, and is now continually sapped by the breach of the sea on either side.
Such a disjunction appears already to have taken place in more than one instance at the northern extremity of the island, where a narrow channel cuts off from it the littl 3 circular islet called La Gabbia; and further on in the prolongation of the same direction, (which is that of the longitudinal extent of the main island,) three or four insulated rocks rise above the water-level, identical in constitution with the nearest extremity of Ponza, and connected with it by a reef which may be traced by soundings, and seen on many points when the sea is calm. The island of Zannone stands at no great distance further on in the same line, and forms the extremity of this range of submarine heights. The proofs of rapid and continual destruction visible in the main island of Ponza, render it probable that the remaining insular eminences of this chain were once united even above the sea level.
The island does not offer a single uninterrupted and central ridge or axis with a gradual slope on either side, as is often the case with such strips of elevated land. Its present form rather leads to the supposition that it once consisted of two parallel but irregular ridges, branching off from the massive eminence which terminates the island to the south. Of these ridges the westerly one is almost wholly worn away by the violence of the swell to which this quarter is almost incessantly exposed. The few more durable fragments that remain of it, project as capes into the sea, rising in height from the interior of the island to their extremity, where they terminate in an abrupt cliff, thus reversing the general figure of ordinary promontories. The eastern range of hill not being subjected to so constant an erosive force, is-less degraded. There are, however, few points on which any portion of its seaward slope remains, the perpendicular escarpment of its water-worn face dropping in general directly from the acute edge of the opposite or landward slope.
A number of pointed and picturesque rocks of columnar trachyte rising from the sea on either side of the island, at short distances from its steep cliffs, add to the proofs of its greater original width, in the same manner as those which connect Zannone and La Gabbia, indicate its former extension in a longitudinal direction. Besides those which appear above the water-level, there are many sunk rocks between and around them. At a certain distance however from the island, the water suddenly deepens and becomes unfathomable.
The southern extremity swells into a bulky and rounded eminence called La Montagna della Guardia, a name common to the principal height of almost every island in the Italian part of the Mediterranean, and derived from the look-out which till within a very few years was necessarily kept there day and night, to give notice of the approach of the Barbaresque corsairs, which were in the habit of paying frequent spoliatory visits to these straggling and unprotected islands. This mountain, if it may be called so, rises to about 800 feet above the sea, while no other point of the island exceeds 500. It has a gradual and concave slope on the north-east towards the circular cove which forms the port, and the neck of land which connects it with the remainder of the island. On every other side it is bounded by cliffs, with or without a talus at their base.
Throughout the remaining circumference of the island, in consequence of the depth of the sea by which it is continually corroded, and, probably, by reason, also, of the existence of some marine current which sweeps away the detritus of its shores, no accumulation of fragments appears to take place at the foot of their escarpments. These, therefore, present the most complete natural sections, in which the constitution of the island may be studied with the greatest facility.
The brilliant whiteness of many rocks', the strongly contrasting colours of others, their remarkable forms, and the irregular manner in which they are mutually disposed, give an extraordinary and striking aspect to the island, particularly when approached from the east. The range of cliffs on this side, seen from a short distance, presents the characters of an ideal geological section coloured with conventional tints to distinguish the different rocks which compose it. The colours made use of for this purpose in the accompanying sketches are the same as in Nature, and scarcely deepened in tint.
The substance of the island, with the exception perhaps of the massive bed which forms the capping and the southern front of the Montagna della Guardia, is trachyte. This rock, however, varies considerably, and frequently in character. The mineral composition of these varieties is very similar. All consist principally of felspar, and differ only in a greater or less admixture of mica and quartz.
The rock, which from its superior durability appears to support and strengthen the less solid parts with which it is intimately associated, is universally prismatic, and generally divided into groups of small but very regular columns, from which common character I will distinguish it for the present by the name of prismatic trachyte. Its predominant colour when broken is grayish or whitish yellow, mottled with irregularly parallel streaks of a pinkish brown, ochry brown, or blackish blue tint. The surface of the columns, and consequently the natural face of the rock, is of an ochry brown, apparently produced by the infiltration of an oxide of iron. The ferruginous matter has frequently penetrated to the interior of the prisms, producing rows of concentric stripes, usually parallel to the outer surface, and wholly independent of the direction of the other streaks or zones, mentioned above. The latter distinguish themselves by alternations of different texture as well as colour, the darker layers being universally more compact and fine-grained, as well as harder than the intervening parts of a lighter tint.
These zones traverse uninterruptedly a great extent of rock, without any regard to the position of the columns, and generally cutting them at some angle to their axis; thus indicating, that a partial modification of internal structure in the substance of the rock, preceded its separation into prismatic concretions. They are not necessarily straight, but frequently waved or contorted in concentric curvatures, like the stripes of certain varieties of marbled paper; and this both on the large and small scale. The thickness of the streaks varies from some inches to that of the finest thread. This variegated appearance is at times exchanged for one in which the reck assumes the character of a breccia of fragments of different colours and grain embedded in a zoned basis. This latter variety generally occurs towards the extremity of the mass, and where it loses its prismatic division.
This species of trachyte usually exhibits an earthy-granular base, consisting of felspar, with numerous imbedded plates of mica, hexagonal or rhomboidal, but seldom entire, and imperfect half-fused crystals of glassy felspar. It is porous, particularly the more earthy and lighter-coloured lamina?, and the direction of the porous parts as well as of the vacuities themselves, coincides with that of the stripes. The dark-coloured zones are not only of a finer and closer grain than the intermediate layers, but harder and apparently more siliceous; in some places they become so compact, as to communicate to the rock a sharp and splintery fracture approaching to conchoidal, and a flinty aspect. This is particularly the case, where it resembles a breccia. On these points the rock' flies, when touched by the hammer, in the manner of flint, and rings like glass. The imbedded fragments are often, not always, equally siliceous with the base, and so firmly cemented to it as never to separate at the line of contact. They seem to be portions of the zoned or variegated trachyte, broken off by friction before the whole was consolidated, and enveloped in the parts which still remained liquid. Where the alternate zones are most contrasted in colour and texture, the whiter and more friable ones show a minute spherolitic structure. The globules are of felspar, generally hollow, and internally ragged and angular. The base is compact, fine-grained, somewhat siliceous, and of a dark gray or a reddish brown colour. Complete and gradual transitions from this to the ordinary zoned or marbled variety may be observed within the compass of the same block; the spherolitic concretions increasing in number, and appearing drawn out into a long ellipsoidal or lenticular form, until they form together a whitish earthy zone or vein; while the intervening compact matter is equally stretched out into stripes which retain their colour and texture. These passages lead me to be of opinion that even where no traces of spherolitic structure are visible, the ribboned arrangement of the rock is owing to the mass of matter having been drawn out in the direction of the zones while still liquid, after a previous separation had taken place of the feldspathose spherolites, (which are analogous to the vitro-lithoid globules of glass furnaces,) and the impure semi-siliceous base. A close examination of these zones, makes it obvious that the finer and darker parts possessed a higher fluidity than the earthy and more feldspathose ones, and that the different degrees of mobility of these alternate layers, was the chief cause of their irregular wavings and contortions. Almost every distinct crystal of felspar or mica may likewise be observed to have produced a similar irregularity in the neighbouring zones, proportioned to its size and form, by the resistance it offered to their freedom of motion. The elongated crystals of both minerals have generally taken the direction of the movement, their longer axes lying more or less in the plane of the zones; and frequently a single crystal of felspar will appear to have been broken up and carried away piecemeal, by the friction of the neighbouring laminae, leaving a train of half-fused fragments with empty spaces between them.
The columns into which this rock is divided assume every direction, though with a general tendency to the vertical. They are sometimes united into fanshaped clusters. At others, the rock appears separated into irregular vertical beds, composed of columns arranged in bundles, like faggots, and disposed horizontally, or nearly so; their axes being always perpendicular to the sides of the bed or vertical seams. The width of the bed is always proportioned to the diameter of the columns. They are sometimes bent in one or more directions, preserving however their general parallelism, and recovering by degrees the straight direction on either side. They are usually small, and the smallest are the most regular. Very perfect five- or six-sided prisms, from half an inch to four or five in diameter, are closely grouped together, in vast numbers, into clusters; and by the sharpness of their angles, seen in the perpendicular face of the cliffs, exhibit an appearance, which was compared both by Dolomieu and Hamilton to some kinds of Roman brick-work. Those columns which are piled horizontally are universally the least and shortest, the vertical ones much longer and of greater diameter.
The superior hardness of this rock, aided probably by its prismatic structure (which under a certain arrangement of the columns adds to the durability of the mass as much as a different disposition often facilitates its destruction), has enabled it on many points to resist (lie breach of the sea more effectually than the other varieties of trachyte, and the conglomerates. Hence it constitutes most of the insulated rocks that surround the island; its columnar structure adding much to the picturesque effect of their outline. The prismatic trachyte also forms a large part of the main island, particularly of its southern moiety. It abounds throughout the range of vertical cliffs of the whole eastern shore, as well as on the opposite side of the island from the Punta del Fielo to that de' Paraglioni.
In these natural sections it is constantly accompanied by a rock which I am about to describe, with which it alternates in irregular massive beds, assuming every possible direction, except perhaps the horizontal.
In its ordinary character it consists of an earthy and very friable substance of a pure white or grayish white colour, inclosing numerous fragmentary blocks of an ash gray or grayish green semi-vitreous trachyte, which have in general much of the fibrous structure and elongated cells of pumice, are extremely brittle and light, and occasionally pass into common glassy pumice.
On a close examination the basis of the rock appears to consist of pulverulent particles of the same substance. It crumbles easily, and seldom possesses sufficient solidity to allow a specimen to be preserved entire. The inclosed fragments reach the size of a foot or more in diameter. They contain imbedded glassy felspars and bronzed mica. These crystals occur also, but less frequently, in a loose state in the earthy base. Some few of the fragments consist of trachyte without any glassy lustre, and resembling the prismatic trachyte described above, or other varieties not met with in situ in the island. One large block which I took out of this conglomerate was identical with the loose crystalline trachytic lava of the Monte Tabor, in Ischia, of a dead leaf colour, with numerous large and distinct crystals of glassy felspar. None of the fragments are water-worn, and they all have evidently been enveloped in the base immediately upon their ejection by the volcanic impetus. They cohere strongly to the matrix, but are separated from it by decided fracture lines, which, as well as their variety and number, make it impossible to doubt that the rock is essentially a conglomerate, in spite of the remarkable passages it exhibits by insensible gradations into rocks of a different character.
The inclosed fragments, from their superior solidity, protrude from the weather-worn surface of the cliffs, and protect the line of rock, immediately beneath, from the rain by which the more exposed parts on either side are corroded, giving rise to pyramidal or buttress-shaped masses, each capped by one of the larger blocks, and standing out from the front of the escarpment in parallel rows. When these are in considerable number, an effect is produced which may be easily mistaken at a distance for the result of a columnar division*. The rock is on the contrary amorphous, with the exception of an obscure appearance of irregular stratification, which shows itself in some masses, the larger fragments being arranged in parallel lines like the flints of our chalk-beds, a character far from uncommon amongst the volcanic conglomerates.
It has been observed, that the prismatic trachyte and this conglomerate are associated confusedly throughout the greater part of the island, interrupting each other alternately with an irregularity of direction of which the accompanying profiles will convey a clearer idea than any verbal description. The general impression arising from an examination of all their relations, is that the prismatic trachyte has broken through the conglomerate from below, and forms irregular intruded masses or dykes within it. On some few points, however, the former rock appears to have overspread the surface of the latter, and to have been in turn covered by other beds of conglomerate.
Change observable at the point of contact of the Conglomerate with the Prismatic Trachyte. 
It is remarkable that throughout the numerous sections afforded of the common boundary of these two rocks, in the precipitous shores of the island, the conglomerate is found almost without a single exception to be altered at the plane of contact with the prismatic trachyte.
This alteration extends from two to thirty feet in depth when the natural section of the rock cuts the plane of junction at right angles. When its direction is oblique or partially parallel to that plane, of course the alteration extends over a much larger surface of the bare cliff, and at first induces the false notion of the existence of very considerable masses of the altered rock. This consideration must be borne in mind in studying the profiles of these cliffs.
The change consists in the gradual transition of the while and earthy base of the conglomerate, as well as of the cellular and glassy fragments it incloses, into a compact resinous trachyte or pitchstone porphyry, of a dark bottlegreen colour, containing numerous crystals of glassy felspar and bronzed mica, and breaking readily into lamellar and rhomboidal fragments. This at least is its predominant character: occasionally it exhibits a testaceo-globular structure, becoming a pearlstone similar to that of Iceland and the Andes, of a greenish-gray colour and pearly lustre. In other places it assumes a still more regular globular concretionary division both on the large and small scale. In the latler case the rock resembles an aggregation of beads, breaking into concentric layers; this variety contains cellular and fibrous parts like the vesicular obsidian of Lipari. The large globiform structure is strikingly exemplified in a rock which projects from the cliff within the Chiaja di Luna, near the entrance of the Roman gallery. The alteration appears here to have proceeded to a great depth; and the globiform structure occurs in that part of the pitchstone bed which is nearest to the junction with the prismatic trachyte. The rock shows a tendency to the columnar division, the columns separating into large globes or ellipsoids, placed one above the other. These balls, when they have been exposed a short time to the weather, desquamate at a touch into numerous concentric coats, like those of a bulbous root, inclosing a compact nucleus, of which the laminae have not been sufficiently loosened by decomposition; though the application of s. ruder blow will produce a still further exfoliation. The globes vary from a few inches to three feet in diameter. This structure passes not only into the columnar, but also into the lamellar; the lamellae being either straight or twisted into the most intricate contortion. The longest axis of the ellipsoids is invariably in the direction of the lamellar or prismatic system to which they belong.
These varieties of natural division are certainly not produced by decomposition, which has evidently only assisted in disclosing an original configuration. In the globular pitchstone this process has been accelerated by the quantity of cubic pyrites disseminated throughout it. Sometimes, in the immediate vicinity of the prismatic trachyte, the pitchstone incloses small nuclei of obsidian of an olive green colour, translucent at the edges, and with the conchoidal fracture of glass; and the pitchstone becomes more fine-grained, compact, and homogeneous the nearer it lies to the boundary of the prismatic trachyte.
This boundary is universally an abrupt and decided separation; but, on the other side, the former rock graduates insensibly into the earthy and friable conglomerate, passing through a modification of pitchstone of which the predominant colours are an orange-green and a waxy yellow. It contains the same minerals, and has the same texture and lamellar structure as the dark bottle-green pitchstone; except that, as it recedes from the latter rock, it becomes less compact, and slightly porous. The conglomerate structure may be traced very clearly through this intermediate rock. The imbedded fragments sometimes assume the resinous lustre and texture more completely than the base: sometimes the reverse takes place; probably according to the original nature of the fragments. When these were of earthy unverified trachyte, they have resisted more or less the agency which tended to reduce them to pitchstone, and remain visibly enveloped in the more resinous base. This often exhibits a wrinkled appearance incircling these refractory fragments, from which it appears to have possessed a partial fluidity. This rock is frequently penetrated by minute veins filled with a white earthy substance, of a feldspathose character; they traverse both varieties of pitchstone, and ramify into the conglomerate without changing their direction. In the Chiaja di Prontone, two vertical dykes, averaging two feet in width, cut through the green pitchstone, which appears here of unusual extent. They are filled with a loose white trachytic conglomerate, extremely fine-grained. It was probably washed into fissures of the rock by the water which held it in suspension.
The constant occurrence of these bands of green and yellow pitchstone at the junction of the prismatic trachyte and the semi-vitreous conglomerate, and the easy gradations of colour, texture and structure, by which they invariably pass into the latter rock, unquestionably prove them to proceed from its alteration by contact with the prismatic trachyte. In fact, this rock, as has been already noticed, bears on most points the appearance of having forced its way upwards by cutting through the incumbent conglomerate in various directions, and occasionally of having spread laterally over it. Its regular coJumnar division, which has without doubt been assumed subsequently to the occupation of its actual position, proves it to have been protruded in a state of liquidity, or at least of softness.
This liquidity as well as its elevation could only have been the result of intense heat, and it may therefore easily be believed to have effected the partial fusion of the fine and loose base of the feldspathose conglomerate, and of the imbedded fragments, of this rock, (already in a semi-vitreous state, and therefore more easily fusible,) with which it came in contact. The compactness of texture resulting from this imperfect fusion, as well as the local varieties of concretionary structure, are probably owing to the pressure and friction sustained during the forcible protrusion of the prismatic trachyte, and locally modified by accidental circumstances. The porphyritic character of the pitchstone will not prevent our recognising it to proceed from the fusion of an earthy conglomerate rock, since both the fragments dispersed through the unchanged rock are themselves porphyritic; and the earthy pulverulent basis incloses broken crystals of felspar and mica, which in the pitchstone porphyry have only been rendered more visible by the semi-fusion and discolouration of the finer and less refractory matter that envelops them.
The semi-vitreous conglomerate appears on some few spots to inclose irregular and indistinct beds of a very earthy trachyte of an ash-gray or yellowish white colour, with numerous felspar crystals and plates of mica. Its hardest parts are identical with the prismatic trachyte, but it does not ever like this assume a columnar division. It is often slightly zoned with brownish yellow streaks, and is fissile in their direction. From the earthiness and loose texture of its base, it is seldom possible to determine its line of separation from the earthy conglomerate with which it is intimately associated, and which is evidently of contemporaneous formation. For this reason no attempt has been made to distinguish the two rocks in the accompanying profiles. Where this earthy trachyte comes in contact with the prismatic, it suffers the same alteration as the neighbouring conglomerate, being converted to a certain distance into green pitchstone, or more frequently into a pearlstone, which exhibits superficially a kind of bloom similar to that of a plum, and contains some white and cellular parts.
The alternations and mutual interruptions of the rocks above described will be observed, from the plates, to be repeated throughout the Southern half of Ponza. Towards the Northern extremity the prismatic trachyte almost entirely disappears. With the exception of a pyramidal mass of rock which forms the extreme point called the Punta dell' Incenso, opposite the Islet of La Gabbia, it is not visible, on the eastern face of the island, beyond the Chiaja del Schiavone; nor on the western, north of the Punta de' Faraglioni.
The cliffs within this space are composed of the semi-vitreous conglomerate to a certain distance, beyond which the mass of the island consists solely of an anomalous rock of very variable and singular characters, and constant only in its extremely siliceous nature. From this circumstance I may distinguish it by the name of Siliceous Trachyte. 
In their external features, the escarpments formed of this rock, and exposed to the erosion of the sea-spray and meteoric agents, strongly resemble the siliceous burr-stone of the Paris Basin, having the same carious, hatched, and angular surfaces. Their predominant colour is yellowish white or gray.
Under its most general form this rock offers a white earthy and friable substance traversed by irregular concretionary parts of a compact texture, an ashgray colour, and often a flinty lustre. These usually constitute the greater part of the rock. The earthy portions cut with the knife like fine chalk, which they exactly resemble in outward appearance. Their whiteness is often of the purest and most dazzling brilliancy; and their detritus carried off by the rain from the rocks in the interior of the island, is collected from the beds of torrents, and made use of as whiting by the inhabitants. The compacter parts seldom yield to the knife at all. Both appear to consist of nearly pure silex, and are fused with the greatest difficulty by the blowpipe. They contain a few disseminated crystals of mica, which are in general wholly or partially decomposed into an ochry earth. The fissures of this rock are often lined with ferruginous dendrites, or with a coating of delicate quartz crystals.
By degrees the compact parts predominate still further, and inclose numerous very perfect crystals of felspar, some of which are in the state of kaolin, while others are glassy and brilliant, roundish grains of pellucid quartz, and a few rare crystals of black mica. The basis of this porphyritic rock is close grained, and exceedingly siliceous. It is heavy, solid, and tough; of straight and rather uneven fracture, a clear grayish white colour, and strikes fire readily with steel. Through this rock the white earthy parts only appear scattered in irregular patches, giving it a brecciated aspect; and often disappear altogether for a considerable space. At the northern extremity of Ponza, west of the Punta dell' Incenso, this quartzose porphyritic trachyte is traversed by an irregular vertical vein from six inches to two feet in diameter, which incloses where it is widest a number of fragments of the same rock evidently broken off from the sides. The vein is filled by a blackish clay studded with cubical iron pyrites with a smaller proportion of copper, accompanied by crystals of quartz. This ore, as well as the crystals, is attached in greatest quantity to the sides of the vein and the surfaces of the fragments it incloses, coating them over with a metallic crust, and impregnating the substance of the rock to a certain distance with disseminated pyrites. A brown and yellow clay iron ore also encrusts the sides of the vein in some spots, and stains the rock to which it is attached, to the depth of a few inches. The washing of this vein by the sea-spray and rain clothes its exposed surfaces with a coating of green carbonate of copper.
On the west side of Ponza, and particularly within the Chiaja delle Forne, this siliceous trachyte presents the appearance of a coarse breccia. Irregular masses of a fragmentary aspect seem to be cemented by a less compact, and often very earthy basis, into which however they may be often observed to throw out venous ramifications, or pass by insensible gradations. If, therefore, they were originally fragments, most of them must have been enveloped before they were entirely hardened, as was conjectured above in the case of the siliceous and brecci-form parts of the prismatic trachyte.
These blocks are generally ribboned or mottled with blue, brown, red, yellow, light-green, white, and an infinity of intermediate tints. Their texture is usually close, fine grained, and flinty. They also possess the lustre and general aspect of flint; sometimes the grain approaches to that of chalcedony, and the cavities are lined with a mammillated coating of this substance which graduates into the surrounding rock. Imbedded plates of mica and imperfect felspar crystals occur in them. In the earthy parts the mica is usually decomposed into rusty specks. This rock rings like glass under the hammer, and flies into exceedingly sharp-edged fragments, translucent at the edges.
It is in general heavy and dense; but in some parts becomes light and porous; the cells are then elongated in parallel lines. The crystals of felspar and mica appear drawn out in the same direction; the former broken up and half fused. In this state it appears passing into pumice, but is equally siliceous with the compacter parts. It is often intersected by veins of almost pure quartz of a milk-white colour; some of these are 3 or 4 inches in width, and are cancellated, or formed of plates crossing one another, so as to leave angular spaces between them. In disposition and aspect they are very similar to the quartz veins of granite and gneiss. Where any fissures occur, they are lined with quartz crystals. Amongst the massive blocks inclosed in this brecciated rock, I observed one of extraneous origin. It is granitoidal, composed of glassy felspar, quartz, and a very little mica. This fragment left its impression in the siliceous rock, on being detached, while the other masses of fragmentary appearance will not separate along their seeming boundary lines.
Towards the upper parts of this extremity of the island, and particularly at the summit of the cliffs which face the east between the Punta dell' Incenso and the promontory marked § in the map, the siliceous trachyte passes into another variety of rock, also of a fragmentary character, which wherever it has been long exposed to meteoric action is rendered extremely carious, and acquires a dead-leaf or iron-rust colour, with a dull earthy aspect. The fragments generally appear fibrous like pumice, and are united together by a siliceous cement. This cement resists decomposition, while the fragments it envelops have decayed to a considerable depth into a sort of clay, which mixes readily with water, and is therefore easily carried away by the rains; and hence arises the cavernous and corroded character of the exposed parts of the rock. The fragments themselves also decompose unequally, from containing alternate hard and softer zones, and their fibrous aspect is in great part derived from this circumstance. This rock in its unaltered state is traversed by irregular fissures, which are lined with numerous groups of quartz crystals, some measuring an inch in length, having frequently an amethystine tinge, or coated with red oxide of iron. Some of the fragments also appear to be agglutinated by limpid quartz and oxide of iron.
Such are the different varieties of this singular rock; all of which pass insensibly into one another. It is not easy to determine the real relations of the siliceous trachyte to the semi-vitreous conglomerate which succeeds it on the south. At the western side of the island the former rock seems to overlie the latter; but in the cliffs on the opposite shore their position is reversed. At each spot the limits of the two rocks are evanescent, and it is impossible to say where one ends and the other begins. This uncertainty is perhaps occasioned in part by a mutual penetration taking place along their common boundary, but chiefly by the difficulty of distinguishing the white earthy base of the conglomerate from the equally white and earthy parts of the siliceous trachyte.
The small cap-shaped islet called la Gabbia, which is divided from the northern extremity of Ponza by a narrow strait, consists entirely of siliceous trachyte, presenting the same varieties as in the main island.
Prom the above details, which will I fear be found tediously minute, but which were rendered necessary by the complex and singular nature of the rocks to be described, it will appear that the trachytic rocks of the island of Ponza are distinguishable into two masses; the one an earthy trachyte, pretty uniform in structure and composition, associated with a conglomerate of pumice and semi-vitreous trachyte, which is almost universally converted into pitchstone near the former rock: the other a very quartzose porphyritic trachyte of a novel and anomalous character, which is also accompanied by breccias and conglomerates equally siliceous.
The relative positions and mutual interference of these varieties will be best understood from the accompanying outline sketches of the principal cliff ranges of the island.
The most interesting of these natural sections is that which circumscribes the Chiaja di Luna, a deep semi-circular cove opening to the west, and corresponding to the harbour of Ponza, a similar indentation of the eastern shore, from which it is only separated by a narrow and rocky isthmus. Across this the Romans, when masters of Ponza, effected a communication for land carriage between the opposite bays by means of an arched gallery cut through the rock of prismatic trachyte and lined with reticulated brick-work. This passage still remains entire, and carries off the waters that drain down the concave slope of the Montagna della Guardia towards the port, which would otherwise do considerable injury to the town and quays, by wearing away the friable conglomerate on which they are chiefly built.
The cliffs forming either horn of this crescent (the Chiaja di Lunaf) present the usual irregular intermixture of the prismatic trachyte and semivitreous conglomerate; the latter invariably passing into pitchstone towards its line of contact with the former. The central part of the curve is occupied by a deep bed of loose earthy tufa (trachytic conglomerate) J. Both the upper and lower parts of this mass contain coarse fragments of pumice and compact trachyte; disclosing its stratification, which in the intermediate bed is not perceivable from the uniform fineness of the fragmentary matter. This rock contains a few broken crystals of felspar and mica, and a large proportion of magnetic iron-sand. Its characters are very distinct from those of the semi-vitreous conglomerate already described; it possesses little or no coherence, and incloses none of those blocks of glassy trachyte which are characteristic of the other rock. A similar conglomerate occurs on other neighbouring parts of the island, but never shows any signs of disturbance, always overlying the rocks already described, and adapting its strata to the irregularities of their surfaces.
In the instance under consideration, the disposition of these fragmentary strata proves them to have been deposited subsequently to the formation of the prismatic trachyte against which they lean on either side; apparently filling a deep chasm between these two masses, which in all probability was the result of some violent convulsion. This observation may appear superfluous, but is called for by the resemblance of the nearly vertical bed of trachyte on the right side to a dyke or intruded mass. Its evidently posterior origin to the tufa which bounds it on one side, proves that it cannot have been really produced in that manner.
The natural section of this bed of tufa presents an absolutely vertical wall about 300 feet high; which being sapped by the waves whenever the westerly winds blow directly into the cove, peels off at intervals in massive laminae, and thus continually offers a fresh surface.
Beds of a similar conglomerate, probably once a continuation of the same mass, are observable on the south side of the cove. One portion of them has been deposited on the uneven and concave surface of a mass of prismatic trachyte, all the strata following the sinuous outline of the latter rock. Another set of strata lie horizontally across the edges of two neighbouring masses of the prismatic trachyte and semi-vitreous conglomerate, as well as of the former waved tufa, all of which must have simultaneously suffered a certain degree of denudation before its deposition. These beds of tufaceous conglomerate contain large fragments of all the varieties of trachyte mentioned above, which have the aspect and forms commonly met with in the ejected blocks of volcanic conglomerates.
Another series of similar strata, and equally to all appearance a continuous part of the same deposit, shows itself on the opposite side of the island, forming a line of cliffs which range southward from the Punta della Madonna, at the entrance of the harbour of Ponza. These also rest indifferently upon the prismatic trachyte and semi-vitreous conglomerate. No alteration is ever observable in them at their boundary with the former rock; their separation from the latter is equally decided and complete. Both had evidently been consolidated before their deposition, and have remained undisturbed ever since. The same tufa crops out on two or three other points towards the base of the Montagna della Guardia, and forms a partial covering to the slopes of the hills to the north and west of the harbour.
This stratified conglomerate is in turn surmounted by the huge bed of rock which caps the Montagna della Guardia, and occasions its superior elevation over all the other heights of the island, where no subsequent formation covers the primary trachytes.
This rock varies in colour from a dark iron gray to a reddish or purplish gray and lead blue. It is uniformly dense, heavy, and extremely hard, striking fire readily with steel, and so tough that specimens can with difficulty be obtained from it by a hammer of the largest size. Very few porous parts are observable. It appears to be composed principally of crystalline felspar, varying in the size of the grain from the compactness of some clinkstones, which it then resembles, to a coarse granitoidal aggregation of large and brilliant but imperfect crystals of gray or reddish white felspar, with a few small crystals and numerous minute grains of augite, and some hexagonal prisms of mica. I met with some felspar crystals nearly three inches in diameter, and these are accompanied by augite, bearing the same proportion to them in size as the ordinary minute grains to the common-sized felspars. In some parts the basis alone is gray, and incloses a vast number of distinct rhomboidal felspars of a reddish colour, which project from the exposed surfaces of the rock by the destruction of the intermediate matter. In general the colour appears to be owing to the dissemination of minute augite; and even in the large felspar crystals which are decidedly tinged with the predominant hue of the rock, there is probably a certain proportion of augitic matter introduced sufficient to produce this effect.
This rock is every where more or less columnar. The columns of the upper part of the bed which caps the hill are rudely formed, and of an enormous size. Lower down they become more regular and smaller. The detached rock forming the Punta della Guardia, the extreme southern point of the island, is an example of very perfect columns collected into a fascicular group and with a double curvature. Many columns, by exposure to meteoric action, and particularly to the sea-spray, become carious, wasting exactly in the manner, if I may be allowed the comparison, of a decaying tooth. Their coating is of a more durable nature than the interior, so that when once decomposition has worn through this crust on any single point, it advances rapidly in all directions through the inner substance, leaving the shell comparatively whole.
The rock described above is one example of a particular species of felspar rock, which occurs very frequently among the volcanic districts of Italy. It is always closely related to trachyte, and occasionally assumes, in some of its parts, the mineralogical features of that rock. It is generally, however, distinguished from it by a greater closeness of grain and weight, by its uniformly darker colours, and the compactness and brilliancy of its felspar crystals. It passes on the other hand, by acquiring a scaly texture, great compactness, and a laminar structure, into phonolite (clinkstone); and when the latter character is wanting, into compact felspar. In mineral constitution it is identical with many rocks which have been classed by geologists under one or other of these terms, being composed principally of felspar with a small proportion (never perhaps above 10 per cent) of augite, hornblende, or mica. Its specific gravity ranges from 2-65 to 2-90. To avoid circumlocution, and at the same time distinguish it from those other rocks of the same family, I shall designate it for the present by the name of graystone. Its colour is in fact the most constant as well as obvious character of the rock; and, wherever I have observed it, is uniformly of some shade of gray, generally leaden, purplish, or iron gray; even the disseminated felspar crystals usually share more or less in the predominant tint of their basis.
The same rock appears in the Scoglio della Botte, Ventotiene, and San Stefano, amongst the Ponza Isles. It is of very frequent occurrence throughout Ischia. The insulated rock on which the castle is built is a well-known example. It is found in the north-west angle of Procida, in the hill of Cumae, at Marmorata, in the Monte Olibano, and many other points of the Phlegraean fields, in almost all the Lipari Isles, and among some of the older currents of Itna. In most of these spots its disposition is obviously that of a lava bed or current, and in some the crater whence it issued can still be distinguished.
The massive covering of graystone from which the Montagna della Guardia derives its boss-shaped form, is upwards of 300 feet in thickness. Towards the east it rises in a bluff cliff from a rapidly sloping talus, strewn with enormous blocks that have fallen from above. Where the vertical face of the rock takes off from this inclined plane, a stratum of bright red friable tufa, like coarse brick-dust, crops out from beneath the graystone, and reposes on the white semi-vitreous conglomerate. Here, therefore, is another instance of partial alteration in a conglomerate by contact with a later mass of lava-rock, though in this case the alteration has not proceeded to any degree of fusion or vitrification, as in the instance of the pitchstone beds.
On the south the graystone descends to a lower level, and sinks beneath the sea in the Punta della Guardia; on either side of this cape it may be seen to lie directly on the semi-vitreous trachytic conglomerate, which here exhibits no appearance of change at the plane of contact; probably because the heated mass having flowed from above down the slope of the hill, cooled superficially as it advanced, and upon reaching this rock did not retain sufficient heat to influence its texture. In fact, this is the habitual conduct of ordinary lavacurrents, which are seldom,—it may I believe be said never,—found to produce any alteration of importance in the rocks which they meet with in their descent. It is while the boiling matter is forcing its way from below through the-overlying strata which impede its expansion, (as was the case with all the largest kind of dykes and protruded masses of the trap family,) and before it has been enabled to part with the intense caloric that actuates its rise, upon the easy terms afforded by the open atmosphere, that the rocks with which it then comes in contact suffer from its proximity; and this, in a degree determined by their nature, the duration of the contact, the temperature of the lava-mass, and other modifying circumstances.
Westward of the Punta della Guardia, the graystone sends out into the sea another low promontory called the Punta del Fielo, which forms the southern limit of the Chiaja di Luna. Here some strata of loose tufa appear broken through as well as covered by the contiguous rock. These are evidently the prolongation of the strata seen beneath the cap of the hill from the Chiaja di Luna. The whole mass of graystone is continuous, forming but one entire bed, and apparently bearing the same relation to the somewhat basin-shaped concavity occupied by the Harbour of Ponza, as the analogous though smaller rock of the Monte Olibano, near Pozzuoli, to the crater of the Solfatara. In fact, the disposition of the stratified tufa which clothes the principal slopes of this basin,—a much safer criterion than mere form,—points it out as the remnant of a large crater, as was judiciously observed by Dolomieu.
Graystone occurs in no other part of the island.
Palmarvia. 
The high and rocky islet of Palmarola lies about four miles and a half west of Ponza and in a parallel direction to it. It is scarcely two miles in length, and of a very unequal breadth. Like Ponza, this island seems to have lost much of its original extent. Detached groups of craggy rocks stretch to a' considerable distance from both its northern and southern extremities. On the west side rise three or four similar masses, lofty, precipitous, and separated from the main islet. These and the steep cliffs by which it is girt round, exhibit unequivocal signs of the powerful degradation to which it is exposed, particularly on the western shore, from the superior violence of the swell occasioned by the prevailing winds, which blow from that quarter over a vast expanse of open sea. This destroying force tends rapidly to separate the island into two nearly equal parts. The opposite indentations which occur towards the middle of its length, called La Forcina and 11 Porto, are indeed already connected by a narrow channel, practicable to small boats, in the formation of which, however, art appears to have assisted nature. On either side of this channel the island rises to a height of from four to five hundred feet, swelling gradually towards the south into a peaked eminence, overhanging a steep cliff of tufa, and situated near what may be supposed the centre of the original area of the island. The northern height forms a steep dome-shaped mass, resembling in its outline the Montagna della Guardia in Ponza. The surface of Palmarola is well wooded, and its appearance, particularly on the western side, extremely romantic and picturesque. It is neither inhabited nor cultivated, and therefore clothed in the unchecked and exuberant vegetation natural to the climate, and fostered by the richness of the soil. The myrtle, dwarfpalm, and wild-figtree spring up with peculiar luxuriance wherever a few feet of rocky ledge afford them sufficient depth of soil; while the cytisus, genista, cistus, and numerous tribes of aromatic herbs, occupy every cleft in the craggy cliffs. 
The precipitous shores of this island exhibit the same abrupt and irregular intermixture of the prismatic trachyte and the semi-vitreous conglomerate which has been observed in Ponza. The conglomerate here also, as in Ponza, graduates in every instance into dark bottle-green pitchstone, where it comes in contact with the prismatic trachyte. I could not observe any indications of the siliceous trachyte which forms so large a part of the other island. The prismatic trachyte, however, becomes highly siliceous in many parts, and is universally ribboned with a multiplicity of zones of different shades of white, yellow, blue and brown, varying in compactness and in the proportion of silex they contain. These zones are still more constant and remarkable than in the analogous rock of Ponza. Their wavings and contortions on the small as well as on the large scale, resemble those of mica-schist and gneiss. Here also, as in Ponza, there exists every indication of the zones being owing to the rock having been drawn out in their direction while in a half-liquid state, after a partial separation had taken place of the pure feldspathose part from the mixed siliceous base; the local obstacles, both internal and external, that more or less impeded this motion, were obviously the cause of the irregulari-ties of the laminae. This species of trachyte composes the greater part of the island and all the insulated rocks around, apparently detached from it by the destruction of the intervening conglomerate, which yields with greater facility to the erosive action of the waves. The columnar division prevails, but the columns are generally larger than those of Ponza. On the north side they present vertical ranges of great magnificence and regularity, running up to a height of from one to two hundred feet. Many of the columns are articulated. The exposure of these mural ranges to the breach of the sea at the north point, has produced several caves of no great depth, but with a striking architectural effect; resembling that of Pingal in Staffa, but having in general a much more lofty entrance. Some detached rocks have by the same process been perforated with arches.
The zones of this rock are unequally affected by the wasting influence of the atmosphere, the loose feldspathose layers decomposing more readily than the others; and this circumstance gives the false appearance of a schistose or laminar structure to the exposed surfaces of the rock. The direction of the zones, which is continuous through a great extent, and seems usually to coincide with that of the bed or dyke itself, cuts the axes of the columns indifferently at every angle. The surface of the rocks, as at Ponza, is of a rusty or bluish brown. 
The huge rocky boss that forms the northern extremity of Palmarola, entirely consists of prismatic trachyte. It may be observed to abut at a very high angle upon rocks of a different nature on either side of the island. To the east the supporting rock is the ordinary white conglomerate with fragments of glassy trachyte, which is converted, as usual, into dark green resinous trachyte (pitchstone), the passage taking place, as elsewhere, by imperceptible gradations through a band of reddish yellow semi-resinous trachyte. On the opposite side of the hill fronting the west, the northern rock of prismatic trachyte is separated from another mass of the same nature, by an intervening bed, nearly vertical, of a dark coloured pearlstone, from 25 to 30 feet in thickness, which graduates into the latter rock, and appears to be the result of an alteration produced by the contact of the neighbouring trachytic rock, similar and contemporaneous to that effected by the same mass in the conglomerate on the other side of the island.
The prismatic trachyte subjected to this change has lost its columnar division, but preserved its zoned structure; the pearlstone presenting the same parallel, and often sinuous laminae, which retain a general parallelism of direction to those of the unchanged rock. The texture of the alternate stripes varies likewise in the pearlstone, the basis of which consists of a compact substance of pearly lustre, and a deep lead-blue colour, breaking into small angular pieces. This is ribboned by numerous thin zones of black enamel (pitchstone) strongly resembling obsidian, having a complete conchoidal fracture, but wanting the acuteness and transparency of the fracture-edges which characterize that mineral. These zones of black pitchstone may be observed to be themselves passing into pearlstone, by inclosing more or less numerous minute spheroids of this substance, identical in colour, texture and lustre, with the broader zones, which consist of an intimate and confused agglomeration of similar globules, and have acquired their semi-lithoidal texture and clearer colour by a devitrification of the pitchstone. In the part of the bed lying nearest to the prismatic trachyte, by which the change seems to have been accomplished, the zones are distorted into very irregular and repeated curvatures, and contain large knots and lenticular masses of black glassy pitchstone. This variety of pitchstone is rarely porphyritic. It decomposes superficially, and at the sides of the minute and otherwise imperceptible fissures which intersect the rock at right angles to the plane of the lamina;, into a compact white substance. Hence wherever the fracture has followed these fissures, the pearlstone appears ribboned with white instead of black stripes. This alteration is in some parts not confined to the surface, but affects the whole thickness of the layer of pitchstone, which then resembles a pure white enamel, retaining its conchoidal fracture.
The southern moiety of Palmarola is principally formed of loose stratified conglomerate or tufa. Strata of this nature compose in particular a lofty cliff facing the south-east, and extending, from the Capo di Vardella to the Punta di Mezzo-giorno. They everywhere repose conformably on the irregular surfaces of the prismatic trachyte and its accompanying semi-vitreous conglomerate. They are of the same character as those of Ponza, consisting principally of triturated pumice, and inclosing, particularly in the lower strata, larger blocks of this substance (the scoriae of the accompanying trachytes), and a few compacter fragments of the neighbouring rocks. Amongst the latter I found some of an ash-gray pearlstone imbedding numerous crystals of felspar; and others of a similar rock in which the felspar is very brilliant and glassy, the spherolitic globules being irregular, generally hollow, and lined with minute crystals apparently of the same substance, while others closely envelop a single imperfect felspar crystal.
Zannone
I have already adverted to the island of Zannone as lying in the ideal prolongation of Ponza, with which it is connected by a chain of sunk rocks detected by soundings, besides the more obvious ones which rise above the water-level in the same line.
The area of this island is scarcely a mile in its longest dimension, which runs North and South, and half a mile in width. It consists of a ragged longitudinal ridge rising gradually from the southern extremity, and after suffering one abrupt depression from which it recovers immediately, terminating towards the N. at a considerable height in a steep and rocky promontory called Capo Negro. The slopes on either side are covered by low brushwood, and afford occasional pasture to a flock of goats and some cattle belonging to proprietors resident in Ponza.
The geological constitution of this island is singular, since above two thirds of its mass is composed of trachyte, which rests at the North point upon limestone.
The former rock is extremely siliceous, and identical with that of La Gabbia, and the northern portion of Ponza, exhibiting the same intimate mixture of concretionary ramifications haying a flinty texture and a more or less porphyritic structure, with white earthy patches. It is associated in the same manner with marbled and brecciated masses assuming a great diversity of textures and colours in the same block. The white porphyritic trachyte with crystals of quartz is, however, the predominant rock; and composes in particular the mass which immediately overlies the limestone of the Capo Negro. The mica which is here abundant, in some parts of the rock has decomposed to a certain depth from the weathered surfaces into a reddish ochre. The felspar is brilliant, and the base extremely siliceous, and of a pure white. This rock is occasionally divided into tangled groups of very regular columns varying in size, but sometimes as small as those of the earthy prismatic trachyte in Ponza. In its general character, however, it presents a singularly rude, shapeless, and craggy outline, and all the external features of burr-stone ; the decomposition of the mica and corrosion of the earthy parts, giving a cellular and carious aspect to its superficial parts.
It is possible that some of the columnar groups which I observed on the eastern side of the island may consist of earthy trachyte; but, as the shores of the trachytic portion present few vertical sections of any considerable surface, and are rendered otherwise difficult of access by heaps of enormous detached blocks, which prevent the approach of a boat with any swell except on a few points, it is not easy to put every rock of the island to the test of the hammer. My examination was also limited in time by the rapid approach of a burrasca, which drove me hastily back to the port of Ponza for shelter.
The boundary-line of the limestone and superposed trachyte is effectually concealed on either side by a large talus of debris. The limestone is of a bluish gray colour, hard, of semi-crystalline grain, and intersected by numerous veins of calcareous spar, which constitute a large proportion of the mass. I could find no organic remains. It has all the characters of transition limestone, and appears to correspond with that of the Monte Circello, a vast mountainous rock, (once the island of Circe, but now united to the continent by the flat levels of the Pomptine marshes,) which rises exactly opposite Zannone at a distance of 10 miles, and has been described by Brocchi, as differing from the ordinary Apennine limestone, and decidedly transition. The fragment of this rock which forms the Capo Negro in Zannone, exhibits highly inclined strata, directed W. N. W. by E. S. E., and dipping towards the Italian coast.
The loose blocks which have fallen from this limestone rock towards its junction with the trachyte, and make up the talus by which the line of contact is hidden, differ in character from the rock which forms the extreme point of Capo Negro. Their colour is a dark reddish-gray approaching to black; they are no longer traversed by calcareous spar veins, effervesce with the greatest difficulty, and appear to the lens to consist entirely of a close aggregation of cubical crystals, which are most perfect within the fissures and small cellular cavities that penetrate the rock. There can therefore be little doubt that the limestone has been converted into dolomite to a certain distance from its contact with the overlying trachyte, to the protrusion of which it is difficult not to attribute the elevation of this insulated fragment of a transition formation. The frequent repetition of an analogous circumstance in the Alps, where enormous masses of Alpine limestone are rendered crystalline and penetrated with magnesia by the proximity of augitic basalt, and a secondary granite with which it is associated, may be urged in support of this hypothesis.
Scoglio della Botte, 
A peaked insular rock, which has acquired this name from the rude resemblance of its form to a boot, rises above the sea-level at about a third of the distance from Ponza to Ventotiene. It is composed of graystone similar to that of the Montagna della Guardia in the former island ; exceedingly compact, hard, and tough, of a coarse crystalline or gran i to idal texture; the crystals being almost solely of felspar with a deep purplish gray tinge. The visible crystals of augite are few, small, and imperfect. The mass of the rock is split into rude prismatic blocks. It is superficially coated by a thin pellicle of a blackish colour like a dull and poor varnish, which I conceive to be analogous to the black glazing observed by Humboldt to invest the surface of the granitic rocks of the cataracts of the Orinoco, and apparently produced by long exposure to sun and moisture. Beneath this the rock is remarkably unaffected by decomposition, perhaps because the process of mechanical abrasion by the violence of the waves which break upon it, advances more rapidly than the chemical influence of the atmosphere.
In calm weather the base of this rock may be seen to extend at no great depth below the surface of the water to considerable distances in most directions, but particularly towards the west. There can be little doubt indeed that it is the solitary remnant of a mucli more extensive mass, and is indebted forpreservation to its extreme solidity, without which it must have been long ago swept away by the powerful forces of destruction by which in so exposed a situation it is almost without intermission attacked.
Ventotiene 
This island is removed considerably to the eastward of the group already described, lying nearly at equal distances from Ponza and Ischia, upon a straight line which may be imagined to connect them. Its area has nearly the form of an acute rectangular triangle; the base, which is about four miles in length, running East and West, and the ohtuser angle pointing to the North. The surface has one general slope from the summit of the Capo del Arco, a bluff promontory which forms the acute and western angle to the eastern side, where a small port, almost the only landing place in the island, is excavated from the indurated tufa rock. A cluster of habitations is grouped around it. With the exception of this one point, the island is circumscribed by perpendicular cliffs. Its physical structure is of the simplest character, and corresponds exactly with that of the island of Procida, and of the neighbouring hills which are so closely grouped together in the volcanic district included between Naples, Pozzuoli, Cumae, and Aversa, and which are generally known to geologists under the name of the Phlegraean fields.
The island consists of parallel and wavy strata of yellow and brownish tufa, resting upon a massive bed of graystone, which rises to a height of more than 300 feet above the sea at the extremity of the Capo del Arco, and sinks gradually towards the east below the water level. Though the remainder of the island exhibits no rock but tufa, this slanting bed is without doubt prolonged beneath it, and supplies the solid foundation of the entire mass. Indeed the graystone which disappears on the south side at less than half its length from the eastern promontory, is visible throughout the whole of the north-western side. This rock is of a dark violet or purplish gray, fine-grained and compact, strikes fire readily with steel, and contains small imbedded crystals of felspar, augite, and mica. The upper part at the Capo del Arco is cellular, and even scoriform at the surface of the bed. The lower is amorphous, or split into massive blocks by irregular fissures, which are evidently but the result of the retreat that accompanied its consolidation. The external surfaces of the rock are exceedingly dark-coloured, almost indeed black; and this sombre colouring together with its harsh forms give an unpleasing and savage effect to the cliff that towers in gloomy majesty above a group of lesser rocks projecting from its foot. The westerly swell, which at the time of my visit forced its way with tremendous roarings into the caverns it has worn in these black, shapeless, and scorified masses, added to the horror of the scene. The fable of the dark dogs that barked round the waist of Scylla appeared to me more appropriate to this promontory than to that less fearful one on the Calabrian coast.
The tufa of Ventotiene is interstratified with lapillo, or coarse fragmentary pumice. It is incoherent in the higher parts of the island; but to the east, and particularly wherever it approaches the sea-level, sufficiently indurated to be quarried and shaped for building-stone. The loose strata contain many fragments of granite and sienite, and of a graystone sometimes resembling a compact felspar or clinkstone. I met also with some pieces of a rock composed of mica and pyroxene alone, identical with many which occur in the conglomerates of Somma. In the lower parts of the island these fragments are partially water-worn.
Throughout the whole extent of Ventotiene the upper strata of tufa are more or less penetrated to a short distance from the surface by a calcareous cement, producing a sort of sandstone, which is disposed in irregular horizontal layers connected by smaller vertical veins. These are often interlaced in a reticulated manner, and occasionally have the figure and structure of stalactites, with a fistular cavity in the centre. A few fragments of shells are observable in this sandstone, but too much broken to allow of their being recognized. Where the volcanic sand predominates over the cement, this stone is hard and solid; where the calcareous matter abounds it is friable. In some parts the grain is fine, and the rock becomes compact, and shows a semiconchoidal fracture.
These beds appear of very recent origin, and to have resulted from the deposition of calcareous particles by water filtering through strata of loose volcanic sand of different degrees of fineness. But, since the rest of the island is entirely volcanic, from whence are we to suppose the calcareous matter derived? It is difficult to conceive it to originate any where but in the upper bed of vegetable earth through which the rain water percolates, carrying off the substance of the testacea that are undergoing decomposition there. And this hypothesis is corroborated by the remarkable quantity of recent land-shells observable in the stratum of soil wherever it is cut through. Lime is known to exist in a state of combination with the other constituents of volcanic rocks, and consequently of their triturated particles which compose the tufa. From thence we may suppose it taken up by the superficial vegetation, and converted into a carbonate, which is transferred to the mollusca that feed on these plants, and require it for the construction of their shells. The ultimate decomposition of these restores it to the earth, where it enters again into the composition of a mineral mass.
A similar process seems to take place on the sides of Vesuvius, where calcareous stalactites have been observed to form upon the roofs of caves in the lava rocks occurring within the cultivated district of the mountain. The volcanic island of St. Helena presents an analogous formation, which is probably by no means of rare occurrence amongst volcanic districts, though the absence of other sources of calcareous matter is not in all so incontestable.
San Stefano. 
East of Ventotiene, and at the distance of rather more than a mile, lies an islet of this name, which is made use of as a depOt for convicts by the Neapolitan government. It is nearly circular, less than half a mile in diameter, and surrounded by steep and craggy cliffs. In structure it resembles Ventotiene, consisting of a single mass of graystone, rising from 150 to 200 feet above the sea, and surmounted by a few strata of loose tufa. The upper part of the rock is exceedingly cellular; the lower has a rude tendency to the columnar configuration. The composition of the rock is similar to the graystone of the larger island.
The surface of San Stefano is deeply indented by two shelving ravines, opening on opposite sides: these I conclude to be the two craters spoken of by Dolomieu. It is, however, probable, that if any crater was originally formed during the protrusion of this mass, the loose and fragmentary parts of its circumference must have been destroyed by the degrading action of the sea. The few conglomerate strata that remain, appear to have moulded themselves on the irregular surface of the bed they rest upon, and are not sufficiently abundant to point out the position of the orifice of production. The proximity of this is, nevertheless, attested by the scoriform character of the graystone rock. A calcareous sandstone similar to that described above in Ventotiene, is found on the surface of this smaller island, and suggests the same observations.
From the above details on the constitution of this group of islands, it will perhaps appear that they afford scope, as was anticipated, for observations of considerable geological interest. It remains therefore to point out the analogies they present to thq volcanic formations of other neighbouring countries, and recall the particular facts which tend to elucidate the yet obscure history of these rocks.
In a general view it is impossible to overlook the decided separation of the rocks which compose these islands into two classes, apparently belonging to two different ages (in this locality at least), viz.
1. The trachytes with their accompanying conglomerates; and 2ndly, those rocks, which, without stopping to discuss the question as to their also belonging or not to the family of trachytes, have been mentioned, to avoid present discussion, by the name of graystone. 
In the island of Ponza, where alone these two classes are found together, they are separated by horizontal strata of tufa, which probably belong; to the later rock, since they have been deposited after the subjacent trachytes had suffered a considerable degree of denudation. The graystone is also in every instance accompanied by its peculiar conglomerates.
The first class of rocks bears a decided analogy to some of the trachytic formations of Hungary, so minutely described by M. Beudant, and is perhaps more nearly allied to them than to the more contiguous rocks of the same family in Italy, France, and Germany.
Thus the prismatic trachyte of Ponza corresponds very closely in mineral composition to some varieties of the "trachyte" of the Hungarian groups. It is however clearly distinguished from the predominant rock species of those districts by the total absence of hornblende, which is so frequent and conspicuous an ingredient in the trachytes of Hungary, as occasionally to bring them very near to the characters of basalt. The Ponza trachyte differs also from that of Hungary, as well as from most rocks of this family yet observed, in the regularity and constancy of its prismatic configuration; but this character is of trifling moment in the comparison, since it mainly depends upon adventitious circumstances; the same mass of rock being in many instances found to occur prismatic in one part and amorphous in another.
Another peculiar feature of the Ponza trachyte is its ribboned structure, in which as well as in its constant association with a semi-vitreous conglomerate, it offers some analogy to the Perlite of Hungary. After an attentive perusal of the great work of M. Beudant, and an inspection of the collection of specimens brought by him to Paris, no doubt remained on my mind that the zoned structure of the Hungarian perlite (semi-vitreous trachyte) and the lenticular form of its lithoidal parts are owing to the substance of the rock having been drawn out in the direction of the zones while possest of an imperfect fluidity, and after the globular-concretionary separation characteristic of pearlstone, had wholly or in part taken place. The motion was probably owing in this case to the subsidence or flowing of the matter, in obedience to the impulse of its own gravity, down a slightly inclined plane, (since the direction of the zones is universally more or less horizontal,) as was the case with the vitreous lava currents of Lipari, Volcano, Teneriffe, and Iceland *, which are ribboned in the same manner, and pass repeatedly into pearlstone. In Ponza and Palmarola the zones are more frequently vertical than horizontal, and appear to have invariably taken the direction in which the mass was impelled, from below upwards, through the broken and separated portions of overlying rocks that opposed its expansion.
In all these cases the curvatures and contortions of the stripes are obviously owing to the obstacles, whether internal or from without, by which the uniform progress of the liquid matter was impeded; and principally to the various degrees of mobility of its different layers, those of coarser grain (and particularly the spherolitic concretions,) retarding the motion of the proximate layers which possessed a greater liquidity. The same remark applies with equal force to the similar rocks of the American Cordilleras. These are described by M. de Humboldt as uniformly ribboned, and often to such a degree as to put on the appearance of stratification; as exhibiting a base composed of bluish-gray semi-vitreous globules, closely compacted together, and inclosing parallel zones and lenticular masses of obsidian (Cinapecuaro, Oio del Agua, del Pinal, &c.); as enveloping fragments of reddish brown trachyte, halffused, at one extremity of parallel elongated cellular cavities. It is obvious at once how closely these characters correspond to those of the pearlstone of Ponza and Palmarola; and they are explained with the utmost facility by the process which is proved to have given rise to them in the latter case. The last variety of perlite quoted above affords a beautiful illustration of the truth of this theory. It is quite evident that the elongated cells which stretch in parallel lines behind half-fused fragments of felspar (spherolites, in the words of M. de Humboldt, "like the tail of a comet from its nucleus,") were created by the inferior mobility of these coarse fragments to that of the finer enveloping mass, and are analogous to the hollow that forms behind any stationary or resisting body which is plunged into a running stream. These cells therefore are certain indications of the direction in which the mass was moving immediately before its consolidation.
I may remark that the pearlstone of Oyamel (the Mountain of Knives) in Mexico, veined with obsidian, bears a still further analogy to that of Palmarola in the vertical direction of its zones, by which these masses are proved to have been propelled from below in the manner of dykes.
It may be mentioned that some varieties of the porplu/re molaire of M. Beudant, as far as can be distinguished from the specimens I have had the opportunity of seeing, are identical with the siliceous parts of the prismatic trachyte of Ponza. The similar varieties that occur in the island of Ischia have been already adverted to. . The siliceous trachyte of the Ponza group must be conceived to correspond to the "porphyre trachytique avec quartz" of Hungary, in its porphyritic character, compactness, quartzose nature, and the chalcedony that lines its cavities. Its veins of nearly pure quartz, groups of amethystine crystals, and the brecciated aspect of its flinty parts, bring it nearer to the porphyre molaire of that country. M. Beudant, indeed, mentions these two species of trachyte as passing mutually into one another, and therefore, as in Ponza, mere varieties of the same rock. Lastly, the overlying conglomerate strata of Ponza and Palmarola, almost entirely composed of triturated pumice, correspond both in situation and nature to the "conglomerats ponceux" of the Hungarian groups.
Little analogy exists between the rocks of the Ponza isles and the trachytic mountains of central France, beyond an occasional rather close similitude of mineral composition, and those other points of resemblance that necessarily arise from their common volcanic character.
The trachyte of the latter district is disposed for the most part in vast beds dipping gradually away on all sides from a common centre of eruption; and alternating horizontally with one another, with varieties of basalt and graystone, and with their conglomerates, which latter are in no way altered at the surfaces of contact; while the analogous rocks of the Ponza group occur in irregular dyke-shaped masses, which interfere with and interrupt their conglomerates in the most arbitrary and irregular manner, at the same time constantly effecting a change in their texture to a certain depth from the plane of contact. These differences will be satisfactorily accounted for by the reflection that the latter formation is evidently of submarine origin, while the trachytes of Prance, which are superposed to a primitive platform averaging 2,800 feet above the sea, and rise themselves to more than double that elevation, must, in all probability, have proceeded from volcanic vents acting under the pressure of the atmosphere alone.
The other trachytic formations of Italy are so little known, that it would be almost useless to bring them forward as objects of comparison; and indeed from their inland situation the examination of their structure is attended with all the difficulties noticed in the commencement of this paper. It may be mentioned, however, that the two groups of the Monti Cimini and Monte Amiata appear to agree with those of Prance in the characters of disposition, and therefore differ in this respect from the Ponza rocks, which they resemble only imperfectly in mineral constitution. The trachytes of the Euganean Hills and of La Tolfa, on the contrary, show themselves, like those of the islands in question, in enormous vertical masses breaking through older formations, which in the last-quoted instance is a transition limestone similar to that of Zannone. The pitchstone dykes of the former locality, and the highly siliceous rocks which accompany the aluminite of the latter, are additional features of resemblance to the Ponza formation.
But independently of the analogies which may be traced in them to other districts, the trachytes of the Ponza group present circumstances of great interest in a geological view, from their novelty and anomalous nature.
The principal of these it may be worth while to recapitulate. They are,
1. The extremely regular and constant columnar division of an earthy trachyte.
2. Its ribboned structure, and the gradations which prove this character to arise from the linear extension of the mass while in a state of imperfect liquidity, coupled with a concretionary process. In fact, in this rock it is easy to trace the operation of three distinct and consecutive processes, to which it was subjected in the following order: viz. 1st. The concretionary arrangement of its constituent minerals into spherolites of felspar imbedded in an impure and partly siliceous base. 2ndly. The movement of the mass by protrusion from below, accompanied by the tumefaction, elongation, and finally the confusion and attenuation of the felspar globules, by the production of porous parts, and the fracture and envelopment of some external portions which consolidated more rapidly than the rest. 3rdly. The separation into columns. Upon reflection it will perhaps appear that these observations are of a nature to explain many of the most remarkable features of some trap-rocks, such as the zoned and schistose structure of clinkstone; and may even illustrate the similar appearances of elongation and contortion so frequent in gneiss and micaslate.
3. The peculiar disposition of this rock; from which it appears to have repeatedly broken through superincumbent beds both of semi-vitreous conglomerate, and of older trachyte; with which it alternates in irregular and more or less vertical beds, almost in the manner of the alternations of different varieties of trap with conglomerate rocks in the transition series.
4. The conversion of the rocks thus cut through, both conglomerates and trachytes, to a greater or less depth from the planes of contact, into pitchstone, generally porphyritic and passing both into pearlstone and obsidian;—a fact which may serve to throw some light on the hitherto obscure history of this remarkable rock. In fact, the pitchstone of Ponza and Palmarola is thus proved to be only a modification of trachyte, effected by a more or less incomplete fusion under considerable pressure and friction; and appears to be produced by this process indifferently from both a trachytic conglomerate, and a solid rock of the same mineral constitution.
These localities, however, do not alone furnish observations of this kind. I could instance various spots in the vicinity of Naples and the isles of Procida and Lipari, in which strata of pitchstone, porphyritic and occasionally with the structure of pearlstone, intervene between intruded beds or dykes of feldspathose lava-rocks and their accompanying conglomerates, graduating into both.
Rocks differing in mineral constitution when submitted to the circumstances under which this modification takes place, will of course produce different species of pitchstone. Thus in Ponza and Palmarola this substance varies with the varying character of the rocks into which it graduates; perhaps even more than might have been expected from the great similarity of mineral composition in the unchanged rocks. All are obviously varieties of resinous or semi-vitrified trachyte. 
The pitchstone of Hungary, according to M. Beudant, passes by repeated and easy gradations both into his perlite (semi-vitreous trachyte), and into a compact lithoidal felspar rock resembling the "porphyre trachytique" and "porphyre molaire."
The pitchstone of the Cantal is derived from a clinkstone (slaty trachyte). That of Egg appears to be basaltic, graduating into that rock. The pitchstone of the valley of Tribitsch in Saxony repeatedly passes into a compact porphyritic felspar, described by M. Beudant as mineralogically identical with varieties of the Hungarian trachytes. At Grantola, which I visited in 1821, this substance intervenes between a felspar porphyry and overlying strata of old red sandstone, and blends imperceptibly with both these rocks. The pilchstones of Scotland are said to occur almost invariably in veins. This situation is easily reconciled to the idea of the fusion of the congenerous rock beneath some overlying bed, which must be split by the expansion accompanying this process, and its fissures occupied by the liquid matter, under such circumstances of pressure and friction as seem requisite for the production of the peculiar texture of pitchstone.
5. The siliceous trachyte of Ponza, La Gabbia, and Zannone, is of considerable interest; since, though the existence of quartz as a constituent mineral in trachyte is no longer a fact of such rare occurrence as it was once supposed, yet in no instance that I am acquainted with, has it been found to enter so largely into the composition of the rock. Even the porphyre molaire of Hungary is far less siliceous than the analogous rock in Ponza. There are two causes, to either of which a hasty decision might refer this abundance of quartz: viz. 1st. Infiltrations of water impregnated with siliceous matter; and 2ndly. That class of changes which volcanic rocks are often observed to undergo from exposure to the action of sulphureous vapours. I am inclined to believe that the first of these processes may have partially modified the local disposition of the siliceous matter, taking it up from one point, and depositing it perhaps in a more perfectly crystallized and purer form on another; and this particularly in the case of the brecciated varieties. But the siliceous base of the white porphyritic trachyte and its numerous imbedded crystals of quartz, can never be accounted for by the supposition of infiltration: and the parts of a different texture or structure must be presumed to have derived their abundance of silex from the same source as this, in the absence of proofs to the contrary. On the other hand, there are many circumstances which discountenance the'notion that these rocks have been subject to decomposition by acid vapours. Such are their general weight and density; the uniformly siliceous nature of the whole mass, (whereas in altered lavas this character is confined to the immediate limits of thefumarole or fissures by which the vapour escapes); the dispersion of numerous grains of quartz through the base of the rock wherever it puts on a porphyritic character; the non-existence of aluminite, which must necessarily have been produced by the union of the sulphuric acid with the alumine of the rock; and lastly, the frequent brilliancy of the inclosed crystals of felspar and mica. It is true that these minerals are occasionally altered, the first into a kaolin, the last into an ochrey powder: but it is probable that this change is principally owing to meteoric influence; and at all events, since it is exactly in the compactest and most siliceous parts of the rock that these imbedded crystals are the most brilliant, it is obvious that the predominance of silex cannot be referred to subsequent alteration. We must therefore conclude that this character belonged to the original constitution of the rock at the period of its production.
6. The brecciated aspect of parts of this rock, as well as of the prismatic trachyte, is important from the analogy it exhibits to the occasional pseudobrecciated structure of the serpentines, the older porphyries, and granite. This appearance is here evidently owing to those parts of the mass which consolidated first having been broken up by the continuance or renewal of its motion, and their fragments enveloped in the part- which still remained liquid. Similar instances of this brecciform structure are to be seen on other points of the volcanic district of Italy; as for example, in a rock of graystone lava between Lacco and Casamicciole in the island of Ischia, and again on the S. E. flank of the rock of Cumae. A close inspection of these and other rocks of an analogous character, leads to the conclusion that a concretionary separation of the constituent minerals influenced by the forces of affinity, often assisted in producing this pseudo-conglomerate structure; and indeed it may be conceived without difficulty, that should such a process take place before the motion of the mass had entirely subsided, or a renewal of motion occur during the action of the elective process, the concreted parts, offering an impediment to the motion of the surrounding liquid, would be broken up and enveloped in such a manner as to participate more or less in the double character of nodular concretions and imbedded fragments.
7. The occurrence of a vertical vein of cupriferous iron pyrites in the siliceous trachyte, having many characters in common with ordinary metalliferous veins, such as the association of the ore with black clay and quartz crystals, is a fact which would have been more striking a few years back, before it had been recognized that trachyte is frequently the matrix of the richest metals; as for example, of the gold of Villalpando in Mexico, of Konigsberg and Telkebanya in Hungary, &c. In the present case the ore appears to have been produced by sublimation, since it penetrates the sides of the fissure and the included fragments, exactly in the manner of the specular iron so common in the clefts of volcanic rocks. The quartz crystals are of contemporaneous formation.
In Ponza the trachytic formation is separated from the incumbent rock which has been designated as graystone, by strata of loose conglomerate, chiefly composed of pumice, and which may belong in part to both the under and overlying formations, since their disposition in the Chiaja di Luna proves them to have been deposited at two different periods. In Palmarola the stratified tufa must be supposed to belong to the trachyte, since in this island graystone is wanting.
The mineralogical characters by which this last rock (graystone) distinguishes itself from the subjacent trachyte have been already sufficiently enumerated. Its frequent occurrence in Ischia, Procida, and the volcanic district round Naples, has been also mentioned; and in the Scoglio della Botte and the islands Ventotiene and San Stefano, we see a series of similar rocks geographically connecting these localities with that of the Montagna della Guardia in Ponza. The huge mass of graystone of this mountain, resting at a great height upon stratified tufa on that face of the hill which overlooks the basin of the harbour, and on the other side following the inclination of these strata in a rapid descent below the level of the sea, has precisely the figure and disposition of a lava-current.
The bed of graystone which forms the substratum of Ventotiene has even more decidedly the form and aspect of a mass which has flowed down an inclined plane in a state of imperfect fluidity. The Capo del Arco is the source of this current, its superior elevation and the scorified nature of its rocks attesting the proximity of the orifice of production. Whatever accumulations of ejected matter may once have been formed to the west of this cape, may naturally be supposed to have disappeared under the erosive attacks of the sea, whose waves continue still to degrade even the solid lava-rock. The fragmentary ejections that fell on the surface of the graystone bed, remain there in the form of conglomerate strata (or tufa), which, as far as I could observe, present no indications of having been deposited below the sea-level. The effect of rain-torrents would be sufficient to give them that occasionally waved disposition and alluvial aspect, as well as their partial induration.
The mass of graystone of San Stefano, though not so decidedly currentshaped as that of the neighbouring island, gives occasion to the same remarks. That of La Botte is reduced to too small a remnant to offer in its figure any indication of its mode of production.
On the whole, it is worthy of remark, that while the different graystone rocks of this group of islands have the general form and disposition of lavacurrents, the subjacent trachytes are on the contrary disposed in a manner wholly different from that of any known body of lava produced by a supramarine volcano. If we reflect on the rare occurrence of such circumstances as are necessary to the obtaining a view of the internal structure of a trachytic formation, elevated by volcanic action from subaqueous vents, we shall be able to appreciate the opportunity afforded in the Ponza group. At the same time it must not be forgotten that the destroying process which has laid open the constitution of these islands to our observation, has without doubt robbed them of a very large portion of their original mass, and, in all probability, of by far the greater part of the fragmentary products by which they were originally enveloped.
In conclusion it may be as well to offer a few remarks on the connection of the Ponza group with the other congenerous formations of the Italian coast. The respective positions of the points on which the volcanic force has developed itself with the greatest intensity, will be perceived at once from the accompanying map. The relations of mineral character between the rocks produced from these different vents are in general extremely close.
The island of Ischia marks the site of one of the main sources through which a vast quantity of feldspathose lavas have been disgorged, mostly of the nature of graystone; while others, consisting almost solely of felspar, have every right that can be derived from mineral composition to the denomination of trachyte. Both species are accompanied by tufas containing much pumice. Ischia is by means of Procida in almost immediate contact with the Phlegraean fields of Pozzuoli and Naples, where upwards of thirty deformed craters, thrown up by submarine eruptions upon a shallow coast, are still distinguishable within a small space. The lavas of this district are chiefly graystone; but some, as for example that of Astroni and the Monte Olibano, are unquestionably trachytic.
Further on rises the insulated cone of Somma and Vesuvius, which originally appears to have produced the same class of rocks, while its later lavas are solely of a basalt, in which leucite entirely replaces the felspar, from the elements of which it is probably in part composed. Some obscure deposits of feldspathose rocks, with their associated tufas, appear at intervals within the recesses of the eastern shore of the bay, as far as the Punta di Campanella. Southward of this cape no traces of volcanic formations exist, I believe, nearer than the Lipari Isles.
Towards the North, the hilly group of La Rocca Monfina, rising above Sessa and Teano, attests another powerful source of volcanic action. Like that of Somma, this vent appears first to have given rise to numerous currents of feldspathose rocks, which were succeeded by leucitic lavas.
The detached points on which eruptions appear to have taken place, though in no great number, within the wide longitudinal valley of the Garigliano, viz. at the Rocca d'Evandro, and in the vicinity of Pofi, Veroli, Frosinone, and Tichiena, connect the volcanic district of the Terra di Lavoro with that of the Campagna di Roma. The lavas produced by these mouths are almost solely augitic. Those of the great volcanic group of the Monte Albano are on the contrary leucitic, the leucite being frequently associated with and occasionally replaced by melilite. North of Rome another series of volcanic vents commences, in which a still closer association of the feldspathose and leucitic lavas is observable. These fall without the limits of the map.
The intervals that separate the volcanic groups of the Terra di Lavoro are occupied by plains of stratified tufa, which appear to have been originally redeemed from the sea, when at a higher comparative level than at present, by the accumulation of the fragmentary matters thrown up by the neighbouring vents, and distributed pretty evenly upon its shores and bottom. These conglomerates, composed of comminuted pumice, seem to have been drifted to a considerable distance up the valleys of the Apennine chain that open into the plain of Campania, at the time when this massive limestone ridge formed the coast of the Mediterranean. This circumstance confirms the opinion that the earliest productions of the volcanos of this district were of feldspathose nature. These stratified tufas must be supposed to extend beneath the space actually occupied by the sea as far at least as the groups of Ischia, Ventotiene, and Ponza, to which they were probably in part indebted for their origin. Deposits of an analogous nature appear on various points of the valley of the Garigliano and on the southern foot of the mountains of the Volsci, bordering on the Pomptine marshes. Others again constitute the undulating plain of the Campagna di Roma covering strata of tertiary marl and sandstone. In all these localities they of course share in the mineral constitution of the lavas produced contemporaneously with them from the neighbouring volcanos.
The extensive tract of the Pomptine marshes themselves, has in all probability a general substratum of this nature, since it crops out superficially on all the higher ground of this swampy expanse, and has been also observed in the lower parts wherever excavations have been carried to any depth*. Here it is covered by local formations of marl and peat, but chiefly by vast alluvial deposits of sand thrown up by the action of the sea, which have already connected the once insular rock of Circe with the main land, and still continue to elevate and gradually leave dry the shelving shore of the coast between Terracina and Ostia. This sand, whether taken from the actual shore, or from the interior of the Pomptine marshes, where it extends almost as far as Cisterna, is found to be composed of grains of reddish flint, of milk quartz, and of amethystine quartz, with a few fragments of felspar crystals and grains of magnetic iron. This composition shows it to proceed from the harder detritus of the Ponza isles, or at least of the submarine rocks of the same nature with which they are doubtless connected.
Thus while the violent sweep of the south-westerly swell is engaged continually in degrading and eating away the already skeleton forms of these exposed rocks, their water-worn fragments are drifted onwards by the same force, and thrown up on the shore of the neighbouring continent, which gains in extent of surface even more rapidly than the islands lose. It is thus that the great law of organic nature exhibits itself with equal force in the mineral kingdom; the destruction of one formation giving rise to the production of another.
It might appear like an omission were I to terminate this paper without a word upon the ages of the formations which have been described in it. I am of opinion that most of our notions on the absolute age of the pyrogenous rocks must be necessarily of a vague, uncertain, and hypothetical character. Whatever doubts may exist as to the exact manner in which many of these rocks have been produced on the surface of the globe, still enough is known and generally recognized concerning the phaenomena in which they originate, to show that with them the collocation of similar beds is no proof of their contemporaneous production. In the sedimental and arenaceous rocks, we infer the age of a whole stratum or series of strata from the observed geological relations of one of their parts, notwithstanding the solutions of continuity or the concealment of intervening portions, that may separate this from the remaining mass. But amongst volcanic rocks we know that by the side of a mass of early date, one of recent formation may be produced tomorrow, exactly similar to the former in mineral composition. And in reality the natural tendency of the volcanic phaenomena is by no means to produce vast and extensive formations at a single epoch; but on the contrary, to form partial masses, one by one, at very distant intervals of time, which yet often agree most closely in their mineralogical characters.
In the case under consideration, if we assume that the graystone of Ponza, Ventotiene, and San Stefano, belongs to the same period, which their nearly equal state of preservation seems to authorize, (and perhaps the analogous formations of Procida, Ischia, and the Phlegraean fields may be referred to the same age,) the superposition of this rock in Ponza to the trachyte, which shows signs of previous degradation, will warrant the inference that the latter rock is of very early date. Its connection with the transition limestone in Zannone conveys no information as to its age, and the conclusion that might appear to follow from the absence of any intervening secondary or tertiary strata, is destroyed by the fact that they are equally wanting above the trachyte.
The question therefore as to the absolute age of this trachyte is involved in complete obscurity.
XV. Observations on the Structure of the Border Country of Salop and North Wales; and of some detached Groups of Transition Rocks in the Midland Counties. 
BY THE REV. JAMES YATES, MA. P.G.S.
[Read March 4th and 18th, 1825.]
OF the rocks which occupy the confines of Shropshire and North Wales, lying between the slate mountains on the West, and the extensive formations of limestone, red sandstone, marl, and gravel, on the East, it may be observed generally, that they are very various in their character, and differ exceedingly in their thickness, their induration, and their colour. They are sometimes earthy and amorphous, and at other times crystalline, in their structure. They have sometimes the appearance of mechanical, sometimes of chemical deposits, and sometimes these appearances are united in the same rock. In their composition, they pass from argillaceous to siliceous, and from siliceous to calcareous; but the prevailing earth appears to be clay, the next in quantity ie silica, and carbonate of lime appears to be by much the least abundant of the three. It may also be remarked, that these strata are of moderate thickness, never perhaps exceeding 6 feet in depth, and varying from that to the state of mere partings between one bed and another. The harder strata are commonly separated by thinner beds of soft clay, and often divide, in consequence of a kind of rude crystallization, into angular or rhbmboidal pieces. All these circumstances produce in them a manifest tendency to disintegration. They are generally conformable in their position, and most commonly dip towards the East; but occasionally they exhibit remarkable contortions. They rise with a gentle inclination, and usually terminate towards the West in abrupt escarpments, while the Eastern slopes of the hills, which they constitute, correspond evenly with the surfaces of the strata underneath. They are intersected also by tortuous valleys, which sometimes expand from the condition of narrow wooded glens into level plains of great fertility. Of the mountainous portions of this tract none perhaps are higher than 1500 feet above the level of the sea. Various kinds of trap-rocks rise through them in great masses, and are distinguished by their abrupt and rounded summits.
Passing from these general observations, we may endeavour to illustrate the nature of the strata under review by the detail of their appearances in particular places. This may be best done by pursuing the section of the different rocks across their basset edges.
1. To begin from the North and proceed gradually Southwards, the line of section, which first claims attention, is in the vicinity of Vale Crucis. The lofty Oernant Mountain rises above the northern boundary of the valley of the Dee, and contains a large slate quarry, belonging to Sir W. W. Wynne. Here the strata are curved with extraordinary regularity into the form of concentric circles, the cleavages of the rock having also the appearance of radii, in consequence of being perpendicular to the direction of the strata. These circumstances are deserving of notice, not only as exhibiting a fine specimen of curvature, but as showing the primitive character of the rock.
At the distance of about 2 miles to the N. E. is presented the perpendicular face of the rocks of Edlw-y-seg. These are part of the edge of the great basin of limestone, containing the coal formation of North Wales Their direction is generally from East to West, but in a waving course, and through a tract of many miles in length. A steep talus of debris covers about two thirds of their height; and above this their face rises almost perpendicularly, presenting a remarkable specimen of regular stratification, and a striking contrast to the forms of the slate mountains in their vicinity. The divisions of the strata of limestone are rendered conspicuous at a distance by beds of black bituminous shale, which lie between them. This shale is for the most part perfectly soft and friable; it is, however, frequently indurated by the addition of calcareous matter, and thus passes into foetid limestone. It is also sometimes mixed with a large proportion of sand, and then resembles very much the mud deposited in the estuaries of the Dee and Mersey.
These cliffs contain various shells and corals, usually considered as belonging to the mountain limestone of England. In the case of shells occurring in the limestone beds, the matter of the shells is generally removed, only casts remaining, or newer depositions of calcareous spar in place of the original substance. But in the beds of shale the testaceous matter seems to be preserved with very little alteration in its texture or composition. In a formation of so great antiquity in the geological history of the globe, this circumstance appears not a little curious and interesting. The softness of the shale in which they are imbedded, also contributes to render these specimens of fossil shells remarkably perfect, the muscular impressions and interior structure of the larger terebratulae being exhibited with great distinctness.
The valley situated between the Craigs of Eglw-y-seg and the Oernant Mountain, contains hills of moderate elevation. Their superior fertility and beauty, the lively red colour of the ploughed fields, and the rounded masses of red conglomerate scattered among the debris of the limestone, prepare the geological traveller to expect a rock such as that of which they consist, and which is hard, highly ferruginous, stratified, tending to slaty, and composed of grains and small pebbles of the older rocks united by an argillaceous cement. This rock is therefore a variety of the grauwacke of the continental geologists. Its extent is very limited. Nearer Llangollen and about the steep hill of Dinas Bran, we find only the common appearances of the beds of shale, slate, and slaty sandstone, about to be described as occupying by far the greater part of the region under our review.
2. The next section which I shall attempt to describe, is represented by a line drawn from Oswestry westward to Llansilin. Such a line crosses, within the space of 5 miles, the basset edges of all the strata from the new red sandstone to the slate.
After quitting the level ground about Oswestry, which consists of gravel, clay, and sand, and covers beds of coal, we come to the strata which dip under the coal, and belong to the millstone grit formation. These strata form several successive ridges, which rise higher and higher as we advance towards the west. The eastern slope of each ridge appears to correspond with considerable exactness to the plane of the strata beneath it, although these strata are overspread with gravel, clay, and sand. The western slope is steeper, cutting across the outcrop of the strata. On the summit of one of these ridges, at the distance of 2 miles from Oswestry, is the race-course, commanding an extensive view of the rounded slate mountains of Wales on the west, and of the plain of Shropshire to the east. Besides the Wrekin and the other hills, which encompass this plain to the south and east, another series of hills meets the eye, which is more interesting to the geological observer, though of inferior elevation. For, as he stands upon the verge of strata dipping east, he sees the hills alluded to dipping in different directions according to the order of their arrangement, so as to form the basin, which contains the coal field, situated on the confines of Shropshire and North Wales. These hills are, 1st, those of Ness-cliff, whose escarpment is towards the South-east; then Greensill; near it the Cleve, which rises with an even slope terminated by a most distinct escarpment towards the east; and lastly the two ridges of Hawkstone, one to the north of the other. Thus the strata of these hills together with those on which the spectator is situated, are seen to converge so as to form a basin for the deposits of coal; and they consequently suggest to him the supposition, that as the rocks beneath his feet belong to the millstone grit formation, those in the series of hills so connected with them may probably belong to the same class of strata.
The ridge, on the summit of whicli the race-course is situated, has a very precipitous escarpment. Along its base flows a small river, called the CynHeth, and the grounds of Llanvorda, the residence of Mr. Henry Wynne, occupy that part of it which lies to the south of the race-course. This escarpment displays in regular succession the strata of the millstone grit formation. The uppermost are found to consist of hornstone, which varies in its colour and texture, sometimes becoming very fine and passing into perfect flint. It divides by its cleavages into rhomboidal pieces, and has evidently supplied many of the pebbles, both angular and rounded, which abound in the gravel between this ridge and Oswestry. Below these strata is a bed, several feet thick, of white sandstone. It consists of grains almost entirely siliceous, which are for the most part cemented into a firm rock by a siliceous deposition: but in many situations the texture of this sandstone is more loose and friable. In some places it is spotted throughout its substance with black and brown oxide of iron; in others it contains the hollow impressions of entrochi. We then come to a remarkable bed of indurated clay, generally of an ochre yellow colour, though sometimes passing into bluish or brownish black. It is light, and adheres to the tongue.
Below this are successive beds of sandstone, the thickness of which far exceeds that of the upper beds, and sometimes amounts to several yards. Some of them contain contemporaneous veins of silica, which are very conspicuous by their projection on surfaces exposed to the weather. Sometimes the sides of these veins are exposed instead of their cross fracture. In these cases they are striated like slickensides, but certainly not from the effect of friction. The upper beds are still white, and somewhat approaching to chert. Those underneath become ferruginous, and contain a few impressions of entrochi and of curved cylindrical forms apparently of vegetable origin. The lowest bed, which is also the thickest, and far exceeds the others in the height of its precipices and the size of its detached fragments, is of a dark red colour, its grains of sand slightly cohering and glittering in the sun. This rock descends to the river, which flows at the base of the escarpment, and also dips under it from the opposite slope of the valley. Its broken and precipitous faces are sometimes reduced by the action of the weather into the form of irregularly rounded masses, and at other times are streaked by the projecting lines of the harder siliceous veins. Pursuing the course of the river from Llanvorda towards its head, we find beds of limestone rising from beneath the sandstone.
The direct road from Oswestry to Llansilin leaves the spot now described at the distance of about a mile to the north. It crosses similar beds, which are extended over a greater space, because accompanied by no escarpment so high and precipitious as that of Llanvorda. We first come to these beds after passing Offa's Dyke about two miles from Oswestry. They are found~through the space of about two miles further along the sides of the road, and in quarries and weather-worn cliffs. They appear to dip uniformly under one another, with an inclination of about 30° to the horizon. The white cherty beds are succeeded by a dark red sandstone, analogous to that which forms the base of the escarpment at Llanvorda. Pebbles of quartz are disseminated through it; the summit of a considerable hill on the left hand of the road called Mynydd Moel, consists of this sandstone. Its exposed cliffs are worn into irregularly rounded masses, and resemble the usual appearances of the red sandstone of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Shropshire. On advancing westwards we next come to a bed which lies under the red sandstone, and consists of grains and small pebbles of quartz with a few pebbles of slate and joints of encrinites, rather loosely aggregated by a calcareous cement. Limestone of the same gray colour with the cement of this conglomerate immediately succeeds; it abounds in corals, encrinites, and shells; large quarries are worked in it on each side of the road: it contains numerous veins, often an inch or more in thickness, of the red sulphate of barytes. Towards the east it slopes gradually with a dip conformable to that of the calcareous breccia and the sandstones lying over it; whereas on the western side, looking towards the mountainous country of Wales, it terminates in perpendicular precipices; it contains beds of soft crumbling shale, and is evidently to be regarded as a continuation of the interrupted chain of the limestone of Eglw-yseg. Among the corallines of these strata is a madrepore, bunches of which are seen on the upper surfaces of the beds of limestone along this ridge, evidently in the same position in which they originally grew. The limestone, which now penetrates and envelops them, has been deposited without removing them from their places, or even materially altering their form. I have observed the same curious phenomenon in the ridge of mountain limestone which rises over the strata of Brecon Forest in South Wales; and I am informed by an accurate observer (Mr. Underwood), that he has seen it in the same formation at Plasnewydd in Anglesea, and on the opposite side of the Menai.
On advancing westward, so as to surmount the ridge of limestone, the eye is impressed by the immediate change in the character of the scenery, from that of long ridges of moderate elevation to the appearance of huge mountains divided by valleys of corresponding dimensions. Between these two kinds of scenery the wall of limestone forms a line of demarcation. The strata, which dip under the limestone, and constitute mountains 1500 feet in height, consist of numerous beds of a slaty micaceous sandstone, dividing by natural separations into rhomboids of a micaceous clay-slate, and of a soft shale. These beds are very numerous, and various in their thickness; but in general the rhomboidal kind is conspicuous among the others, in consequence of the even vertical surfaces presented by its broken strata. It seems to be the same rock with the rhomboidal killas of Devonshire and Cornwall, which Dr. Berger has denominated Common Grauwacke.
Besides the stratified rocks now described as lying under the limestone, a mass of porphyritic greenstone presents itself at Glascoed near Llansilin in five or six considerable hills, which are distinguished by their abrupt rounded forms, rising like irregular knobs among the stratified rocks, and covered with gorse and coarse grass. The strata of limestone appear more inclined where they lie upon the greenstone, but do not show marks of disturbance.
3. 1 shall now attempt some account of the rocks which occur in the direction of the road from Welchpool to Ludlow, containing the country intermediate between the limestone ridge already described and that of Wenlock Edge. The whole of this tract is principally occupied by strata of the slaty micaceous sandstone, dividing into rhomboidal pieces and alternating with shale, which has been mentioned as lying beneath the limestone at Llansilin; but sometimes a crystalline siliceous deposition occurs, and at intervals unstratified masses of trap present themselves. These, together with the remains of organic bodies, will claim our chief attention.
An example of the siliceous deposition is seen to advantage in the park near Powis Castle in the immediate vicinity of Welchpool. It occurs in strata dipping towards the north-west at an angle varying from 5° to 70°, and forms a long ridge with an abrupt escarpment. The strata are not separated by planes, but have a waved and swelling superficies. When broken, they divide into pieces having sharp edges and angles, and triangular or trapezoidal surfaces. In many places the rock becomes very red; in others it is little or not at all coloured with iron; masses and thin beds of clay are found among the strata. From the clayey and ferruginous portions the soil of the park is probably derived; it is fertile, and abounds with fine trees: these circumstances all show the identity of this rock with that so often noticed at Bromsgrove Lickey near Birmingham; in this, however, the imbedded grains of sand are larger than in the Lickey quartz-rock. At both these places the siliceous rock contains impressions of the various shells, corals, &c. which are found in the limestone. In some cases the cavities so impressed have been filled again by a subsequent deposition of calcareous spar, which also forms veins in the rock and entirely penetrates its substance.
Half a mile from Welchpool on the west of that town are large quarries of greenstone worked in the side of an eminence called Standard Hill. The principal cleavages of the rock are nearly vertical in parallel planes 10 or 12 yards asunder. By other cleavages, subordinate to these and perpendicular to their planes, it is divided into columns, which lie in a nearly horizontal position and approach to regular prismatic figures. The colour of the rock is in general a light green, sometimes marked with white specks; it contains small portions of anthracite and carbonate of lime. In a part separated from the rest only by one of the great vertical cleavages, it approaches much nearer to the usual appearance of the trap rocks of Great Britain, being harder, of a dark colour, and containing disseminated grains of iron pyrites.
A grauwacke slate alternating with beds of shale, which forms the ridge of Rallt at a little distance to the north, and great part of the long mountain on the east, is found also at the base of Standard Hill; between it and the greenstone there occurs a dyke or large vein, consisting of rounded pebbles and angular fragments of the contiguous rocks cemented by limestone; each pebble or fragment is surrounded by a coating of white calcareous spar: this dyke of breccia is nearly vertical, and several yards in thickness.
The Breidden group, not far from Welchpool, consists chiefly of various kinds of trap rocks, some of which contain globules of dark brown calcareous spar, crystallized occasionally in diverging radii, and probably derived from the fusion of small fragments of limestone. Sometimes instead of containing globules of spar, the rock contains small angular fragments of limestone.
Trap, similar to that of Standard Hill, occurs again in a hill on the left of the road from Welchgool to Montgomery, immediately to the east of Offa's Dyke. The trap rises in an abrupt and almost square mass above the verge of the hill; it has the remains of a small fortification on its summit, and is called Nant Cribba Moat, being encompassed by a trench. It contains considerable quarries; it is divided like the Standard Rock near Welchpool, by a vertical structure of separation. Large veins of breccia pass through the rock in directions parallel to its great planes of separation, and resemble that of the Standard Rock, except that here the base is trap, and not limestone.
Another large and conspicuous mass of trap is the site of Montgomery Castle; it consists almost entirely of a base of felspar. The trap of Montgomery, like that of Nant Cribba and Welchpool, includes veins of breccia, and also of calcareous spar with coal.
A variety of shale or slate-clay is seen in immediate contact with the trap at Montgomery, and occurs at intervals through the whole extent of country from that place to Bishop's Castle. This slate-clay easily crumbles down on exposure to the weather; it has a conchoidal fracture, and divides into flattened nodules like those of clay-ironstone, and it is remarkably like the slateclay usually found in connection with clay-ironstone and coal. It passes into the rhomboidal grauwacke slate occurring in the whole surrounding region.
Corndon Hill rises, at the distance of some miles to the north-east, to the height of 1700 feet above the sea, and contains the Jtag-stone, which is only a variety of this rhomboidal grauwacke slate, and which abounds in the Forest of Brecon and other parts of South Wales. Corndon also rises exactly like the hills in that district, to a sharp edge, with an escarpment towards the lofty mountainous region.
At the village of Norbury, about four miles north of Bishop's Castle, and at the southern extremity of the Stiperstones, we find a siliceous in connection with a calcareous deposition. The siliceous portion is a gray quartz with a splintery fracture, and somewhat crystalline, dividing into irregular rhomboids and tetrahedrons. In a quarry on the western side of the village the stratification of this rock is distinctly seen, and a large proportion of its beds is full of cavities derived from the testaceous parts of different animals. The casts are chiefly those of a peiitamerus, of the turbinated madreporite of Parkinson, and of a flat fan-shaped bivalve, seen also in the indurated clay of Llanvorda. A few casts of nautilites, entrochi, and trilobites, also present themselves. Veins of sulphate of barytes pass through the rock, and transparent crystals of the same substance extend into many of the cavities formed by the removal of the shells; the same cavities contain portions of the black oxyd of manganese, sometimes in minute botryoidal concretions, and sometimes diffused over the surface of the quartz in dendritical delineations, and also minute fasciculi of silky crystals of malachite. It ought to be remarked further, that although the rock is full of cavities where it is contiguous to the seams and fissures of its strata, yet the substance of the shells generally remains, and the rock is perfectly solid in the inner parts of its rhomboidal distinct concretions.
After leaving Norbury, as we proceed northwards for at least seven or eight miles, we again find the slaty sandstone in regular strata: its colour is a deep dull red; it contains shining particles of mica deposited conformably to the planes of stratification. It is not crystalline, but consists of minute grains of sand, imbedded in a compact, hard, and very ferruginous clay; the surfaces of its fragments are irregularly triangular or trapezoidal. If the usually received order of superposition be applicable to this portion of the strata of England, we have here in its proper place the old red sandstone. But, confining ourselves to facts, we do not perceive that this rock differs essentially from the micaceous slaty sandstone, or schistose grauwacke, which has been so often mentioned as occurring through this region, and which geologists have also called Transition Slate.
The Stiperstones Mountain is a long and steep ridge situated to the west of the tract of the red schistose sandstone just described; its direction is N. and S., and along its summit are seen large weather-worn masses of a cherty sandstone and of a siliceous conglomerate. Both of these rocks have the characters of the strata belonging to the millstone grit formation; the masses of cherty sandsone have a distinct stratification, the planes of which are now nearly vertical, proving them, notwithstanding their singular position along the ridge of a lofty hill, to be the displaced fragments of a more ancient and regular formation. At the bottom-of this mountain and near its north-western extremity is situated the Snailbach lead-mine, which is worked in the slate, and is described by Mr. Arthur Aikin in the fourth volume of the Geological Transactions. A few miles further north rises Pontesford Hill, terminating on its north-eastern side by an almost perpendicular precipice, and said to consist of trap rocks.
On the "higher" road from Bishop's Castle to Ludlow, and near the limestone range of Wenlock Edge, is situated Long Lane Quarry, at a little distance above "the Craven Arms." The rock is a fine sandstone, occurring in strata of considerable thickness, and used in all the surrounding country for building: it occurs also in the form of large thick flag-stones; its colour is a greenish gray; it contains portions passing like veins through its substance, which are of a rusty brown colour, and are full of the cavities formed by small terebratulae and other shells, the matter of which has been removed. These brown veins chiefly accompany the divisions of the strata, and the cleavages perpendicular to them. The shells have been more thickly deposited in their substance than in the rest of the rock; the greenish portion of the rock effervesces abundantly in muriatic acid; it may be called a calciferous sandstone. Small particles of malachite and iron may be observed intermixed with the sand, and probably the colour of the rock may be attributed to the presence of these metals: the various appearances may be explained by supposing the carbonate of lime to have been deposited from a state of solution in the same fluid, which contained the granular and sandy portions mechanically suspended. This fluid must have contained also the shells found in the rock, and would deposit them in the greatest abundance in situations contiguous to the present surfaces of the successive strata. After the consolidation of the calciferous sandstone thus produced, another fluid must have penetrated it by following the course of the divisions of its strata and of its cleavages; this fluid must be conceived to have been a solvent of carbonate of lime, and to have removed, as far as it penetrated, both the substance of the shells and the calcareous portion of the sandstone, at the same time altering the colouring matter. The strata of Long Lane Quarry dip to the S.E. at an angle of about 20° to the horizon; if continuous, they must dip under the limestone of Wenlock Edge. The same rock, sometimes more siliceous and argillaceous and sometimes more calcareous, occupies all the country as far as the vicinity of Ludlow.
The rock to the west of Ludlow, in the picturesque grounds of Down ton Castle, is of the same kind with that on which Ludlow Castle stands, and which is also exhibited in large quarries opposite the Castle. The cliffs which overhang the Tame in this demesne, are in many cases divided in the direction of their natural joints or cleavages into the same rhomboidal forms which have so often been noticed. In other cases the effect of atmospheric decomposition has been to exhibit great oval masses in the midst of the shattered fragments of the rock. Where this rock is quarried, the recent openings are commonly marked by its great conchoidal fracture; and the same principle of aggregation which produces this kind of fracture, produces also the forms of the concentric lamellar concretions elicited under the influence of slow decomposition.
Immediately above Downton Castle, Mochtre Hill rises to the N., its strata dipping towards the river Tame. Along its ridge are quarries of limestone: in one of them, called Weaver's Quarry, the upper strata are thin beds of shale with calciferous sandstone in nodular masses, forming irregular strata between the beds of shale: the limestone lies conformably to the beds above it in strata of very considerable thickness.
The most curious and one of the most frequent fossils of this vicinity is the Pentamerus Knightii, (figured in Sowerby's Mineral Conchology, PI. 28.) a different species of the same extraordinary shell, which has been noticed in the quarries at Norbury. The shell consists of fibres perpendicular to the plane of the substance which they compose. The septum, which divides the shell longitudinally into two parts, has a natural parting down the middle. Its two portions are contiguous below, but divide above so as to inclose a small longitudinal cavity. The connection of the septum with the external curvature of the shell is very remarkable. The fibres of the septum being perpendicular to its plane, meet at right angles the fibres of the curved exterior portion. They do not intermix, but terminate upon a plane, which bisects the right angle formed where the septum meets the exterior curvature both above and below. The shells have a tendency to separate both in the direction of these small planes, and of the broader plane, which divides the septum into its two parts. The fibrous structure, which has now been described, resembles that in the bone of the cuttle-fish, the fossil mytilus, &c.
4. A fourth district, respecting which I shall now notice some particulars, is the country in the vicinity of Church Stretton. The "transition, or newest primitive clay-slate," as it is denominated by Mr. A. Aikin, constitutes the mass of the Long Mountain, which fills up the greater part of the space between the line of section just traced, and the region on which we now enter: it shows itself on the western border of the town of Church Stretton; it is here highly inclined, and much contorted; its beds are thin, passing into a soft shale; but it includes beds of a harder and coarser schist, and in all its general characters corresponds with the appearances of the country about Llansilin and other places already described. In contemplating the hills on the other side of the town and of the Watling Street, which passes by its eastern border, we seem to be amidst the vast ruins of a former world: In Caer Caradoc, the most celebrated of these hills, we may trace two great dykes of stratified clay-stone. They rise in numerous ragged precipices above the summit of the hill, and in their forms, though not in their mineralogical qualities, they resemble the before-mentioned fragments of inverted strata, which crown the Stiperstones.
At the bottom of Caer Caradoc and at its N. E. extremity we find again the same quartz-rock as that of Bromsgrove Lickey, in nearly vertical strata. From a crystalline state it passes into that of a coarse sandstone, the grains of which are rather loosely aggregated; a vein of trap, about 12 inches thick, passes through the sandstone.
In ascending Lawley Hill above the village of Comely, we again find the quartz-rock near the base of its southern declivity. An excavation has discovered in it an irregular space filled with quartz-pebbles and sand, which are rather loosely cemented with clay. This inclosed mass is divided into angular concretions, with a siliceous cement bounding each concretion, and entering more or less into its substance. We may suppose that the sand and pebbles were first united by a loose cement of clay, and that, as the clay hardened, the entire mass formed itself into its separate concretions; the clay having prevented the free entrance of fluids, the interior of the concretions is devoid of any subsequent addition. But the fluid which contained the siliceous matter of the adjoining quartz-rock has penetrated between the concretions, and for some depth into them. The surfaces of the concretions sometimes exhibit the striated appearance of the slickensides of Devonshire and Cornwall, which has been commonly attributed to the supposed sliding of one mass of rock over another; but in the case before us, and in that already noticed at Llanvorda, the striae are evidently the result of crystallization.
The quartz-rock both here and at the base of Caer Caradoc, contains small portions of malachite, and indeed this substance characterizes the rock whereever I have found it. Ascending Lawley Hill, at a situation higher than the quartz-rock, we again meet with the trap, containing, as on the opposite declivity of Caer Caradoc, globular concretions of radiated epidote.
Lawley extends from north to south in a narrow ridge, which may be regarded as a continuation of that of Caer Caradoc. The two extremities of the ridge have a slight, though very perceptible convergence towards the west; thus the hill assumes something of a crescent form, which may be observed in like manner in most of the trap hills of this region: on the east it is encompassed by a valley of considerable depth, which is terminated by a sharp ridge, somewhat tortuous in its course, and consisting of a fine white crystal line sandstone in strata nearly vertical, and in masses, often of great size, scattered over the broken edges of the strata and the declivity of the ridge. At some distance further east is another ridge, nearly parallel to the former, and separated by a second valley; it consists of a slaty sandstone resembling some of the varieties of grauwacke already described, and dips eastward at an angle of rather less than 30° to the horizon. Still further eastward, but in a direction towards the south, a third siliceous ridge commences, which is called the End Hill of Hope Bowdler; its northern extremity is an abrupt cliff, from which it extends southwards about a quarter of a mile; it consists of a straight chain of extremely rugged barren eminences of quartz-rock, in nearly vertical strata. At the distance of several miles to the south, and at the other extremity of Hope Bowdler, we find a coarse serpentine, containing grains of sand. Still further southward a considerable quarry is worked in strata resembling those of Ludlow and Down ton. The strata are nearly horizontal; in the lower part of the quarry they are a yard or more in thickness, and when broken, show most distinctly the great conchoidal fracture: and their natural separation, according to their cleavage, is into square or rhomboidal pieces with sharp angles.
The hilly country of slate and trap terminates about a mile to the north of Church Stretton. We here stand upon the verge of an extensive plain varied only by swelling knolls of clay and gravel. But on coming within two miles of Shrewsbury, we cross a ridge of trap, which is intersected by veins of schist resembling that at Church Stretton. This ridge is called Baseton Hill, and ranges through a considerable space from N. E. to S.W.
I now proceed to give some account of the detached portions of rocks, which are of the same nature with those already described.
1. The first detached district, which I shall notice, is the vicinity of Bewdley. A remarkable trap-dyke is situated a short distance to the north of that town. The Earl of Mount-Norris, through whose estate it passes, has traced it along a straight line of 4 miles in length and in a direction nearly from N. N. E. to S. S.W. It probably extends still further towards Enville in Staffordshire and the forest of Wyre in Shropshire. At Shatterford it crosses the turnpike road from Kidderminster to Bridgenorth, and is accompanied by a bed of coal and by thin broken beds of the usual sandstone of coal-formations, all in a vertical position. It crosses the Severn nearly 2 miles above Bewdley, and occasions a considerable fall in the water, which the bargemen surmount by steering through a gap in the dyke. On the lower side of the water this dyke presents to it a vertical face 16 feet in depth, the sandstone being washed away. It consists of a compact greenstone, similar to those which usually accompany coal-formations. The beds of coal and sandstone and of clay, having the same valuable properties with the Stourbridge clay, extend towards the S.W. in the direction of the dyke, and probably join the coal-formation at the north-western base of the Abberley Hills. The district so occupied is bounded by strata of red sandstone, which rises in picturesque precipices on each side of the Severn at Bewdley, and extends from Kidderminster to the trap-dyke at Shatterford; by beds of limestone, which appear towards the south-west at Burnthorn and Abberley; and by a dyke of white sandstone, which runs for some miles parallel to the trap-dyke, and terminates the coal-formation towards the north-west.
2. Not more than 10 miles to the east of Bewdley are situated the Clent Hills, distinguished by the names of the Proper Clent Hill, and Walton Hill. Hagley Park rises upon the north-western declivity of Clent Hill, the ridge of which is separated by a deep valley from Walton Hill. A branch of the latter ridge, named Calcut Hill, extends still further towards the S.E. in the direction of Bromsgrove Lickey. This cluster of hills is distinguished by its steep slopes, which give to it the characters of romantic beauty. The rock consists for the most part of the red sandstone, which occupies the whole surrounding country as far as Stourport, Bewdley, Enville, and Stourbridge. At a quarry behind "Thomson's Seat" in Hagley Park, beds of calcareous breccia occur in the red sandstone. They sometimes consist of grains of quartz, decomposing felspar, and limestone; and sometimes of larger pebbles of the same substances, though principally of encrinal limestone. They are highly ferruginous, their cement consisting of the red oxyd of iron intermixed with clay, and the whole mass being further hardened by the infiltration of carbonate of lime, which is going on even at the present day. The upper part of Clent Hill consists of a trap-rock, commonly so much decomposed as to form a complete covering of soil, but occasionally appearing in harder fragments, which have resisted the action of the elements. This trap might come under the denomination of grauwacke, as its cement appears to be principally argillaceous, and it is full of small grains of quartz, felspar, and other minerals. But it has not a schistose structure, and does not exhibit any distinct marks of stratification. Walton Hill consists of a porphyritic and sometimes amygdaloidal trap, very much decomposed. The solid rock is not any where visible. But the soil, penetrating to the depth of two or three feet from the surface, and abounding in angular fragments of porphyritic trap, which is also scattered over the hill and is seen in some openings, where it appears to have lain always undisturbed, sufficiently proves that the whole mass of the hill has consisted of this rock. Calcut Hill, which is much lower than the others, is covered with beds of clay, sand, and gravel, and its whole surface is cultivated.
3. The detached portions of the older rocks, which are found in the vicinity of Dudley, may be traced to the distance of about three miles from the Clent Hills. Mr. Keir's account of them, in Shaw's History of Staffordshire, renders it unnecessary to attempt more than a supplementary account of some of the most remarkable appearances, which have been brought to light since he wrote. 
A line drawn from Wolverhampton to Rowley will coincide with the general direction of the chain of hills, which forms the south-western boundary of the South Staffordshire coal-field. The Birmingham canal pursues a serpentine course from Oldbury through this coal-field, the length of which is parallel to the same line. The chain of hills commences rather more than a mile to the south of Wolverhampton, and terminates a little beyond Rowley. All its principal eminences are from 300 to 400 feet above the level of the Birmingham canal. The town of Dudley is situated about half-way between the two extremities of the chain, which at this point is also divided into two portions of the most opposite mineralogical characters.
The northern portion is calcareous. It consists of four hills separated by transverse valleys; all very long in proportion to their breadth; and corresponding in their general direction to the line which has been indicated. The Beacon Hill near Sedgley differs from those further south in yielding lime, which is not only used for building and for agricultural purposes, but also possesses the quality of setting under water. The three hills further south are called Hurst Hill, the Wren's Nest, and the Castle Hill. The two latter are perforated by great artificial excavations. Mr. Downing of Dudley, who superintends the extensive operations carried on in these hills, has favoured me with a very exact transverse section of the Wren's Nest on a scale of 80 yards to an inch.
Since Mr. Keir published his description of the South Staffordshire Coalfield, including a particular account of his own colliery at Tividale, he sunk there a shaft (named Pit N° 11), 55 yards in depth, after which he came to a solid rock of greenstone similar to that of the adjoining hills. The shaft was continued through it to the depth of 35 yards. The workmen then came to coal 4 yards thick, which they described to be in the state of cinders. This pit is at a considerable distance from the base of the Rowley Hills, and on the further side of the road to Oldbury, between it and the Birmingham canal. The other pits in the same colliery are situated towards the south, between N° 11 and the Rowley Hills, and also towards the west and north, but in none of them was greenstone found. If, therefore, this mass of greenstone communicates with the Rowley Hills, it is probably in a direction towards the S. E. Greenstone has been found in the same manner more than two miles from the Rowley Hills at "Moat Colliery," and at Mr. Finch's colliery near West Bromwich.
Since the publication of Mr. Ken's account, coal has been got further eastward, and the result is of some importance in the geology of this district. Shafts have been sunk in the Square Field Colliery near the Swan at West Bromwich. In the Pits N° 1, the Broach Coal is 60 yards from the surface and about 1 yard thick. 56 yards lower is the Main Coal, which is, as usual, 10 yards thick. The dip of the strata in this and some adjoining collieries is towards the north-west, and amounts to 3 or 4 inches in the yard. The fact thus ascertained respecting the dip of the strata in this situation is subversive of the argument for the imagined extension of the coal eastward under the red sandstone, which has been founded upon a comparison of the dip of the strata at the base of the Dudley Hills with their dip in the Warwickshire coalfield near Atherstone and Nuneaton.
Besides the chain of hills which I have already described, another may be traced of a similar character, though of very inferior elevation. It is not continuous, and in most places it is very much altered by decomposition. The indications of its existence, which I have observed, are as follows. Barrow Hill is situated more than half-way from Dudley to King's Swinford on the right hand of the road. Its interior has been in a great measure worked out, and now presents extensive and picturesque excavations. It consists of greenstone, resembling that of Salisbury Craigs, very fine-grained, and containing small crystals of augite. This is accompanied by basalt, which, from its lustre, resembles the Arran pitchstone, but differs from it in being softer, and in yielding a gray streak, and a black, but not porous enamel. The greenstone also includes irregularly-formed globular masses of variously coloured wacke, and veins of calcareous spar, both rhomboidal and fibrous, with quartz, hornstone, and sulphate of barytes in long six-sided tables.
The hilly cultivated ground extending from Barrow Hill to Brierly Hill seems to be of the same formation. At Brierly Hill the greenstone is distinctly seen by the road side near the chapel. Pursuing the line of these hills across some lower ground, we come to a stratified mass of limestone of the same nature with that of the Dudley Hills. It occurs at a place called "the Hayes" in the hamlet of Lye Waste, and forms a narrow broken ridge of small extent, rising very abruptly from beneath successive beds of slate-clay, coal, clay containing balls of ironstone, and a friable substance abounding in pebbles of quartz-rock of various sizes, which seems to be a decomposed greenstone. This substance forms a gritty soil, distinguished by specks of a dirty white and others of a greenish gray, and it may be traced from the Cradley toll-bar to the Lye Waste*. Near the last-mentioned place it incloses pebbles of quartz-rock like that of Bromsgrove Lickey, for which it is quarried as a gravel-pit. When struck with a hammer, it falls in flakes from the sides of the pit, the pebbles dividing by cleavages, which coincide with the surfaces of the flakes of greenstone. To the south of this tract of decomposed greenstone, about Oldenhall, Poxcote, Prescot, and Wollescote, we find sandstones resembling those of coal-formations, and containing the remains of ferns and of trees petrified by calcareous infiltration. The line, along which the greenstone may be thus traced, is parallel to the general direction of the chain of hills before described, and 2 or 3 miles apart from it. The coal-formation, which lies between, is usually considered as a part of the South Staffordshire coalfield, but is separated from it by the Rowley Hills.
About 2 miles south of Oldbury, and the S. E. termination of the Rowley Hills, we find a ridge of coarse conglomerate, called Barnford Hill. It extends about a quarter of a mile in a direction nearly N. and S. Its western declivity is very abrupt, and faces the hills and the village of Rowley. The strata rise towards this side at a high angle, their inclination to the horizon decreasing as they pass eastward. The ridge terminates towards the south in red sandstone near Brand Hall. Towards the north the same conglomerate is seen in the bed of the brook at Oldbury; and the principal head of this stream, called the Lady Well, is remarkably clear and copious like the springs of limestone countries. The pebbles of the Barnford Hill conglomerate consist chiefly of encrinal limestone. With these are intermixed pebbles of quartz and hornstone. The pebbles are sometimes seen impressing their forms on one another, so as to raise the suspicion that some of them have at a former period become soft, although their hardness is now restored. Some of the limestone pebbles are carious on their surfaces, showing that their substance has been partially dissolved. The cement of the pebbles is sometimes calcareous spar, and sometimes a sandstone containing clay together with carbonate of lime; and this sandstone often presents itself lying in thick masses in the midst of the conglomerate rock.
About 5 miles from Birmingham, near the road to Walsall a petrifying spring has been observed, probably originating in beds of calcareous breccia similar to those of Barnford Hill and Hagley Park.
It is further deserving of record, that the proprietors of the Park Field Colliery at Wednesbury, a district where the main coal disappears, and the fundamental limestone was presumed also to have a tendency to crop out, have recently come to regular beds of limestone at the depth of more than 100 feet after sinking through the usual coal beds and a coarse grit underneath them. The highest bed of this limestone, which is of a bluish colour, contains much clay and abounds in producti and terebratulae.
4. The Bromsgrove Lickey presents one of the most interesting examples of the older rocks rising in a detached mass through the red sandstone, and has long attracted the attention of geologists. I offer the following remarks as supplementary to Professor Buckland's paper in the 5th volume of the Geological Transactions. Omitting the small deposits of coal and the recent beds of clay and gravel, the strata composing this range are of three kinds; the red sandstone, the limestone, and the quartz-rock.
The red sandstone incircles the others, and occupies by far the greater part of the country through an extent of 20 or 30 miles on every side. Its stratification is very even, and nearly horizontal. It is seen remarkably well at Tardebig, 3 miles south of the Lickey, both in a quarry and at the enVoi. II.—SECOND SERIES. 2 L
trance into a tunnel of the canal, and also in the road, which leads through the hamlet of Burcot. Its general appearance corresponds with that of the red sandstone already described at Llanvorda, Bewdley, and other places. An account of its appearances at Droitwich more especially, is given by Mr. Leonard Horner in Geol. Trans, vol. ii. p. 95.
In a quarry near the N.E. extremity of the lower Lickey range, the red sandstone is highly ferruginous, and contains small masses of an impure hematite. It is here worked for making lime, as it includes in great abundance grains and small water-worn pebbles of limestone. It thus passes into a calcareous breccia, and in this state it is found a few miles to the north near Frankley Church. Its grains and pebbles are frequently united by a calcareous cement.
The limestone of Bromsgrove Lickey rises immediately from under the red sandstone. I was not able to discover it at the southern extremity of the range; but I remarked, as an indication of its presence either now or heretofore, an abundant growth in that particular spot of the Clinopodium vulgare. Some beds with a copious intermixture of sand appear on the eastern border of the range, to the south of the Birmingham road: and at Colmore's Farm, situated on the N. E. declivity, a bed of pure limestone is worked about 2 feet in thickness and 8 feet from the surface of the ground. A red stiff marl lies over it, and beneath it is a similar marl variegated with blue.
At a short distance to the east of this limestone, and at the base of a hill called Leach Heath, a shaft has been sunk to the depth of 125 yards by Mr. Attwood, the proprietor of the estate. The beds near the surface are indicative of a coal formation, consisting of slate-clay, sandstone, coal, and ironstone, a considerable portion of the last being in the state of a red oxyd. Beds of limestone alternating with strata of slate-clay succeed, extending to the depth of above 100 yards from the surface. The limestone appears to be exactly analogous to that of Shropshire, containing shells belonging to the genera Pentamerus, Terebratula, Productus, &c. with the same coralloids and trilobite, which occur also in the Dudley limestone. The beds of slateclay, which alternate with the limestone, are remarkable for containing the impressions not only of shells, but of plants apparently belonging to some description of fucus, which has been very much branched, with its frond flat and without a rib.
The quartz-rock of Bromsgrove Lickey, constituting the lowest portion of its strata, passes from the state of a coarse friable sandstone to that of an aggregation of minute but perfectly regular siliceous crystals. The coarse friable sandstone, reddened with oxyd of iron, and having an intermixture of clay, occurs at the southern extremity of Leach Heath. In the greater part of the range the sandy particles, instead of thus loosely cohering, are imbedded in a pure quartz, the fracture of which is highly splendent and vitreous. This rock is consequently very hard. Its usual colour is a smoke gray. Besides the particles of sand, it contains white specks of decomposing felspar, with scattered grains of malachite and of brown hematite. Its strata are marked by the same curved swelling surfaces, which were noticed in Powis Park near Welchpool. By its numerous cleavages, crossing the direction of its strata, it is divided into irregular trapezoidal masses: but its fragments are occasionally found approaching to the more exact rhomboidal forms of common grauwacke. Its strata are sometimes separated by thin beds of clay, which are either of a light green colour, or more commonly of a deep red. Sometimes these seams of clay are unctuous to the touch, and occasionally they pass into steatite. Some portions of the hills, though of rare occurrence, consist of worn angular fragments of the quartz-rock imbedded in a cement, which is softer and more argillaceous, but which belongs to the same formation and is of the same general nature with the whole mass of the hills. The numerous quarries throughout the range afford good opportunities of seeing its stratification, which varies exceedingly in its direction, being sometimes nearly horizontal, sometimes vertical, and frequently more or less curved. A remarkable example of the curvature of the strata was exhibited a few years since in a quarry near the S. E. extremity of the range beside the road to Tardebig. The strata were here seen covering a globular mass of soft micaceous shale, unctuous to the touch, highly ferruginous, and with its laminae conformable to the stratification of the incumbent quartz-rock. Through a thickness of two or three feet the quartz-rock was ferruginous, very compact, and of the same deep red colour with the shale, thus passing into the state of the grauwacke of the region to the westward. Fig. 4. of PI. XXVII. is designed to show the position of the strata at this spot, and the mass of dark red micaceous shale, on which they were incumbent.
The compact quartz-rock, which has now been described, forms the great mass of the lower Lickey range. Its crystalline structure is often more or less apparent, and shows, that while its particles of sand, &c. were mechanically suspended, the siliceous base, in which they are imbedded, must have been in a state of solution in the same fluid. But the most complete proofs of this fact are presented in that portion of the range which has been already mentioned under the name of Leach Heath. The strata in this part principally consist of an aggregation of siliceous crystals, rather loosely united by a cement of clay; which is sometimes deeply reddened with oxyd of iron. The crystals are never more than a line in length, but as perfectly formed as is commonly the case in large crystals of the same substance. Their form is that of six-sided prisms terminated by six-sided pyramids. The transverse striae on the sides of the prisms are clearly discernible by the aid of the microscope. These strata abound in fossil impressions of great delicacy, exhibiting the forms of the Dudley trilobite, of the porpital madreporite of Parkinson, of the joints of an actinocrinites, and of the same shells, which occur in the associated limestone. Among these the impressions of the pentamerus are especially interesting as showing the cavities derived from the septa, by which that genus is so remarkably distinguished. Fragments, exhibiting these particulars, are strewed over the summit of the hill and over its eastern declivity, and in the same situation there has been found a considerable quantity of the common ore of manganese. Under the beds of limestone, which have been already mentioned as occurring at the eastern base of this hill, and at a depth of more than 100 yards from the surface, Mr. Attwood in sinking his shaft came to beds of the quartz-rock, abounding in the same fossil impressions and alternating with beds of a micaceous slate-clay. Many of the beds of this quartz-rock, like that nearer the summit of the hill, consist of an aggregation of minute siliceous crystals; other beds are fine-grained and slaty, more nearly resembling common sandstones. The micaceous shale, or slate-clay, is for the most part of a deep red colour from the presence of oxyd of iron, and frequently the quartz-rock in its vicinity partakes of the same character, or, according to the miner's phrase, "runs red."
The red micaceous shale, which has now been mentioned as occurring between the beds of quartz-rock, presents the same vegetable impressions, resembling Fuci, which were before noticed as occurring in the slate-clay of the superincumbent limestone.
5. We now pass to a very interesting range of hills, which in their general characters resemble the Lickey range, but are more extensive, more varied in their component parts, and more illustrative of the connection of these detached masses with the general stratification of England. These hills constitute a diminutive, but very regular mountain chain, extending from N.W. to S.E. beside the course of the Coventry canal and the river Anker. The towns of Atherstone, Nuneaton, and Bedworth, are in their immediate vicinity.
This range, like that of Bromsgrove Lickey, rises through an extensive tract of red sandstone, which is seen advantageously at Baxterley Heath, throughout the parishes of Arley, Fillongley, Corley, Allesley, and Meriden, and in a large quarry at Attleborough. The sandstone attains its greatest elevation at Corley, which according to Mudge and Colby's Trigonometrical Survey, is 521 feet above the level of the sea. It is nearly horizontal in its stratification. A thin bed of striated gypsum has been found in it on sinking wells at Higham and Witherley. Its usual appearance is that of the red sandstone of Lancashire, Cheshire, and the midland counties. But on the sides of the road at Meriden it is distinguished by its great con choidal fracture; and to the north of this spot, in the direction of Pillongley and Arley, its lower strata assume the appearance of a calcareous breccia. In both of these particulars it bears a close resemblance to the red sandstone in the vicinity of Exeter and Teignmouth. The cementing matter of the breccia varies continually even in the same stratum, being sometimes red clay, and sometimes carbonate of lime either amorphous and earthy, or crystallized. The substances thus united into a conglomerate rock are still more diversified, varying in size from grains of sand to pebbles several inches long, and consisting principally of encrinal limestone, greenstone, quartz, and hornstone. The pebbles of hornstone are either red or yellow. A large proportion of the limestone pebbles both here and at Barnford Hill, Frankley, and the Lickey, instead of their usual gray colour agreeing with the uniform appearance of the undisturbed strata of limestone, present the fine yellow colour of Sienna marble. They do not appear to contain magnesia, and evidently owe their peculiar colour to the presence of iron, changing to a brick-red when burnt into lime. Perhaps their colour may have arisen from the infiltration of the red oxyd, which is so abundantly diffused through the base of the rock, and which may have been converted into a yellow carbonate of iron after penetrating the limestone. The strata vary from one to four or five yards in thickness. In the parishes of Fillongley and Arley quarries of this rock have been worked at various places both for building and for making lime.
Regular beds of limestone are worked at Mr. Williams's pits, half a mile north of Bedworth, Mr. Pinkerton's N.E. of Arbury Hale, and Mr. Ludford's at Hockley in the parish of Ansley f. Thus the limestone seems to occur in a line passing from N. W. to S.E. Its dip is in the two former places towards the W. or S. W.; in the last it is in the opposite direction. It appears to rise from under the red sandstone already described, and probably the strata of calcareous breccia repose upon it. Near Bedworth it crops out and dips one foot in three. It is worked by means of a shaft 43 yards deep, passing through beds of a light greenish blue colour, stratified conformably to the limestone underneath, and all abundantly impregnated with calcareous matter, but approaching either to clay-slate or to sandstone according to the proportion which they contain of soft clay or of siliceous particles. Mr. Pinkerton's pits are from 23 to 30 yards deep, the strata dipping 1 foot in 10.
The coal formation of this district borders immediately upon the limestone, which has now been described. It seems to lie in a narrow trough passing southwards to Wyken and Sow near Coventry, and northward by Baxterley and Baddesley Ensor to Polesworth f. The dip of the beds of coal corresponds generally with that of the associated limestone. The upper measures contain a large quantity of carbonized wood, and of iron pyrites, either in cubes, arborescent, or mammillary. The beds of sandstone connected with them contain remarkably fine impressions of some of the plants characteristic of coal formations, together with large rounded masses of trap, and pebbles of slate, limestone, and oolite.
In a direction parallel to that of the formations now described of red sandstone, limestone, and coal, rises a range of hills of a more ancient character. Their whole length is about eight miles. They commence immediately above the remains of Merevale Abbey near Atherstone, and at this part of their course they are intersected by transverse valleys, which are adorned with wood and pasturage, and at the same time in consequence of their depth distinguish this tract of country by the picturesque characters of alpine scenery. The range diminishes in height as it advances towards the S. E. Beyond Griff Hollow it sinks beneath the level marshy plain, which is watered by the river Anker; and, bursting again through the alluvium at Marston, it terminates about half a mile to the south of the Ashby canal.
The fundamental rock of these hills is grauwacke, instead of which quartzrock constitutes the middle portion of the range, the whole being traversed by numerous beds and dykes of greenstone. It may obviate misapprehension to mention, that this is the same range, which is represented in Conybeare and Phillips's Geology as consisting of " coal-shale" and " millstone grit." The grauwacke is seen at almost every opening into the hills from Merevale Abbey to Hartshill, and nearer their southern extremity from Chilvers Coton to Marston. Its dip is generally westward, varying from 20° to 70°. It commonly divides by its structure of separation into rhomboids, and exactly resembles the various appearances of the same rock as seen on the confines of Wales and Shropshire, and through the schistose districts of Devonshire and Cornwall. Among its varieties the most interesting on account of its mineral contents is that of Hartshill Heys, which constitutes the "country" of the rich ore of manganese noticed in Geological Transactions, vol. i. p. 168. 2nd series, and which is like the killas at the southern promontory of Mount Edgecumbe in Devonshire, micaceous and unctuous, of a deep red colour, and readily crumbling into a rich red loam. Other specimens glitter with mica throughout their substance, and may be considered as analogous to the rock at the southern extremity of the Malvern Hills, which has been erroneously called mica-slate. A barren eminence between Griff Hollow and the Coventry canal contains slate, which may be compared to that quarried in the neighbourhood of St. Germains in Cornwall.
The quartz-rock occupies the middle part of the range from Hartshill to the spot where the road to Nuneaton crosses the Coventry canal. Its strata, as well as those of the associated grauwacke, generally dip westward at an angle varying from 40° to 70°. Their surfaces present the same waved and swelling appearance, which characterizes the rock at Bromsgrove Lickey and Powis Castle. I have not however discovered here any organic impressions.
Here are found veins of sulphate of barytes, exactly resembling that which occurs in the trap-rocks of the Malvern Hills. In all other respects the quartzrock of this range agrees with that of Bromsgrove Lickey. Numerous quarries are opened in it; the rock, in consequence of its hardness and its disposition to break into small angular pieces, being used for making roads in all the surrounding country. As it becomes at certain parts more ferruginous and argillaceous, it passes into the ordinary appearance of the grauwacke as already described.
The last substance to be mentioned as entering into the composition of this range is the greenstone, which throughout its course forms either beds in the grauwacke conformable to its stratification, or dykes in the direction of its cleavage. Of these the most remarkable are in Merevale Park. The house formerly called Mere-cliff, and now the residence of D. S. Dugdale, Esq., stands upon the northern extremity of a great dyke, which traverses the park, and, rising in broken wooded eminences above the remains of the softer grauwacke, gives to this demesne its peculiar beauties. In one quarry within the park, veins of calcareous spar and hematite pervade the trap; in another it is seen including fragments of the grauwacke. Beds of greenstone are seen with the grauwacke, in which they lie, in quarries beside Merevale Church, and in the Atherstone Outwoods; in both of these situations the strata dip westwards, at an angle of about 30° in the former instance, and 45° in the latter. Omitting several intermediate localities and passing southwards, we may notice a large mass of greenstone intersected by the Coventry canal, rising upon the southern extremity of the hills of quartz-rock, and where it is contiguous to the quartz-rock, including fragments of it. Another considerable bed is seen at Chilvers Coton, having both above and below a soft unctuous clay of a lively red colour mottled with light green. Still further south, a large mass of greenstone breaks through the grauwacke at Griff Hollow, disturbing its stratification and sending through it some minor branches. The rock, of which these branches consist, is very hard and compact, breaking with difficulty into remarkably sharp fragments, and devoid of any crystalline structure. Its colour is greenish gray, and its fracture splintery. Some beds of it are seen, as represented in PI. XXVII. fig. 3. in a perpendicular face of rock under a shed belonging to "the Newdigate Arms." The mass from which these branches appear to proceed, is about 12 yards thick. It is coarsegrained and perfectly crystalline, but exceedingly tough. Veins of crystallized quartz are found in its vertical rents. Besides its base of hornblende and felspar, it contains, in small disseminated portions, iron pyrites, calcareous spar, mica, and a soft olive-green substance, which seems to be serpentine.
Another bed, in which an extensive quarry has long been worked, is at Marston, where the grauwacke formation terminates. This bed is more than 10 yards thick, and dips east 1 foot in 3. It exhibits veins passing through it in planes nearly vertical, and containing carbonate of lime with siliceous crystals from the smallest size to that of 5 inches in length. These crystals are of the usual form, and envelop portions of the calcareous spar.
6. The last detached groups of the rocks, usually denominated Transition, are those of Leicestershire. As the vicinity of Charnwood Forest has been described, I shall confine myself to a district of much smaller extent, separated by an interval of 8 or 9 miles only from the spot which we have just left. This district lies a few miles east from Hinckley, on the right of the high road from that town to Leicester, and in the parishes of Shilton, Croft, Stony Stanton, and Sapcot. All this region consists of a coarse-grained crystalline greenstone, rising in rocky eminences, between which are situated level plains of alluvium, watered by brooks and sometimes inundated by floods. Such a plain extends from below the village of Stony Stanton to Croft. At this place the stream is discharged between two precipices of greenstone of such elevation, that, if they had not been disjoined, the whole plain above them would have been a lake. The villages of Stony Stanton and Sapcot are on one ridge of rock. But by far the most considerable eminence, and that which presents the most evident characters of a trap formation, is Croft Hill, which runs for nearly half a mile in a direction from N.W. to S. E. The rock is here sometimes porphyritic; and its felspar has a red tinge, which on exposed surfaces is so much increased as to produce, when seen from a little distance, the lively red colour of many syenitic rocks. It has a structure of separation by parallel planes nearly vertical; and by other horizontal planes it is divided into great rhomboidal masses, but without a columnar arrangement. It contains in general no veins of any kind. I only found one exception in a quarry at its eastern extremity, where it is intersected by veins consisting of a coarse serpentine, with white talc crystallized in radiated laminae and with a fine pearly lustre, but changing by decomposition into a soft and very unctuous powder. The occurrence of trap rocks in some situations towards the north-east, as at Barrow Hill near Shilton, and at Potter's Marston and Enderby, indicates the probable extension of this formation to Charnwood Forest.
