XVI.—Remarks on some Parts of the Taunus and other Mountains of the Dutchy of Nassau;—in Explanation of Specimens piresented to the Geological Society of London. 
BY SIR ALEXANDER CRICHTON, M.D. KNT. G.S.W. F.R.S.
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, MEMBER OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY
OF SCIENCES OF GOTTINGEN, HONORARY MEMBER OF THE IMPERIAL
ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF ST. PETERSBURGH, ETC.
[Read Feb. 3rd, 1826.]
J. HE fossil remains of organized bodies belonging to the grauwacke, together with the rocks and minerals which I have the honour of presenting to the Society, were collected in various excursions which I made last autumn in the south and central parts of the dutchy of Nassau.
The chief object of my journey was to witness the medical effects of the many remarkable mineral waters with which that part of Germany abounds, and which are very different from any that are found in Great Britain. This must plead my apology for a want of more minute details in some of the geological observations which I have had occasion to make.
The dutchy of Nassau is a very mountainous country, except on its south frontier, where it comprehends a part of the valley of the Mayne. Its mountains are a part of the great and well known formation of transition and trap rocks which extends from the north-west of Germany, across the Rhine, in the direction of Valenciennes. But those of the dutchy have received the name of the Taunus; although from the little that Tacitus has said concerning them, it appears that the appellation was given by the ancients to the high mountains in the immediate neighbourhood of Wiesbaden, where a new Roman colony had been founded, and where the empress Agrippina was born.
The boundaries of the modern Taunus mountains are the Westerwald on the north, and the valley of the Mayne on the south. The valley of the river Wetter, called the Wetterau, is the eastern boundary, and the Rhine the western one. The extent from south to north along the Rhine is from Assmanshausen, nearly opposite to Mayence, to a little below the mouth of the river L.tlin, in the neighbourhood of Coblentz. The group of mountains called the Hundsruche on the west of the Rhine, is in point of fact a continuation of this chain, being of the same geological character and lying in the same direction. The mountains of Nassau are divided by the valley of the Mayne from the mountains of the Spessart and the Odenwald on the south. After being interrupted by the basalt of the Westerwald on the north, they sink under the formations of Westphalia. Any one travelling from Mayence to Prancfort sees on his left hand the whole chain of what ought strictly to be called the Taunus Mountains. Their highest point is the Feldberg, esteemed to be about 2600 Parisian feet above the level of the Mayne.
This chain, which is the highest in the dutchy, differs from the minor groups which lie to the north of it, inasmuch as it is composed of talc slate and quartz slate on its south side, and of grauwacke on the north declivity. The talc slate dips downwards, running into the mountains with a north-west direction, while the grauwacke on the opposite side rises upwards from the valley in a south-east one. The south brow of the mountain is made up of the basset ends of the talc slate. Its direction and inclination may be traced, especially close to Wiesbaden, in numerous and extensive quarries. The inclination and direction of the grauwacke, on the opposite side, are exposed to view by natural sections, wherever the ground is bare.
This kind of structure leaves on the summit a space or trough, to be filled up, either with very short strata, or with some unconformable matter. The summit is everywhere composed of a thick bed of quartz-rock.
Although this quartz is very compact and tough in many places, yet with a good glass, scales of talc may be discovered in it. In some parts it is darkcoloured, also red, and ferruginous; in others, white or gray. Two places were pointed out to me, (by Mr. Stifft, general superintendant of the mines of Nassau, to whose kindness and accurate knowledge of the dutchy I owe much of what 1 saw,) in which the quartz formed isolated rocks about 16 feet high on the summit of the ridge. They lie on the right of the road from Wiesbaden to Ems, in the middle of a forest, and are known by the names of the Spitzerstein and Alterstein.
The mixture of iron oxyd and talc, by permitting the admission of moisture, favours disintegration; and as the brow of the mountain is covered with blocks and fragments of it, there- is good reason for supposing that the Spitzerstein and Alterstein are the remains of a higher ridge.
Quartz slate from a quarter of an inch to two inches in thickness frequently alternates with the talc slate on the south declivity. It abounds near Schlangenbad, a wild and sequestered spot, remarkable for the cosmetic virtues attributed to its waters. The talc slate is frequently traversed by large veins of crystalline quartz, in many parts of a pale red and amethystine colour. The schistose quartz is found in a few low mountains, on the left bank of the Lahn, opposite the baths of Ems.
In the south chain bordering the valley of the Mayne, the union of the strata of the opposite sides is nowhere to be seen. All the roads which lead from the valley of the Mayne into the heart of the dutchy, pass over the ridge, and descend on the grauwacke.
At the base of these mountains towards the Mayne, masses of conglomerate are common. They consist of rounded and also angular pieces of quartz, cemented by talc and a little ferruginous clay. This degenerates into a thick bed of sandstone, which spreads itself out to the distance of about two English miles from the foot of the mountains, over the tertiary formations of the valley of the Mayne.
This sandstone is composed of quartz sand, oxyd of iron, and talc; and if a piece of it were exhibited without any account of its position, it might easily be mistaken for the English new red sandstone. It is fine-grained, and of various shades of colour, passing from yellowish white to deep yellow, and from light red to dark brown. Its particles have very little cohesion. Many quarries of this sandstone are to be seen close to Wiesbaden, where it is dug for mortar. It terminates in loose sand on the surface of the calcareous deposits of the valley, and, from its constituent parts, appears to have been produced by the attrition of the talc and quartz slate.
A strong and copious salt-spring is met with at the base of the mountain near Soden. From this source the salt was extracted for many years by the usual processes; but an exclusive privilege of selling foreign salt having been lately sold by the government to some individual, this establishment has fallen into decay.
In the village itself are three copious sources of mineral water, all of which contain muriate of soda, although in smaller quantity than the one just mentioned. They also contain a great proportion of carbonic acid, and some iron. I know of no mineral waters similar to them. That they might be usefully employed both as baths and external medicines, especially in scrofula, rheumatism, and many diseases arising from worms and chronic weakness, is probable from their composition. But although their value begins to be appreciated in the neighbourhood, yet the smallness of the village and the want of accommodation for a number of visitors, show that they are not yet in vogue.
The ascent from Soden to Konigstein is steep, and about two English miles in length. The road is formed of the quartz and talc slate. The height is about 1800 feet above the level of the river; the view extensive, rich, and beautiful; and the summit is diversified by small hills. At a short distance from the village of Konigstein, which is on the top of the mountain, one of these (the Falkenstein) exhibits large plates of the talc-schiefer, of which it is composed, standing up in all directions; some are perpendicular, and the rest at various angles. Other hillocks in the neighbourhood consist of shattered plates of the same schistus, in less disorder.
The grauwacke, which occupies a great portion of the dutchy of Nassau, passes from the coarse-grained and quartzy kind to that which is composed of finer and more micaceous parts, and also to one which is more argillaceous. The grauwacke slate, which intervenes between the strata of the coarser kind, is very argillaceous, and also full of mica. Its prevailing colour is bluish green. It is foliated, easily broken, and gives a strong smell of clay when breathed on. These varieties, which compose the bulk of the mountains on the river Lahn, do not alternate regularly with each other. Several beds of hard grauwacke are seen lying on each other without the intervention of the slate. In other places the grauwacke slate intervenes, or a half-pulverulent argillaceous matter lies between the harder beds.
The strata of the grauwacke are in general several feet thick. The slate is seldom more than one foot and a half in thickness, and frequently only a few inches. It is sometimes as thin as paper. In some places it is employed for roofing houses.
These mountains are rich in petrifactions. In the quartzy beds are found the remains of encrinites, and in the argillaceous and micaceous beds numerous casts of shells. Many of these I collected on the top of a high mountain called the Kemmenau, about a league from the baths of Ems, and others from one which rises close to the baths themselves, at a place called the Moshutte, about half way up the mountain.
Cwm y Cae, the beds, without changing their direction, bend up sharply so as to increase their angle to about 50°. Induced by this circumstance, I took a line of, section from this part of the hill by the edge of Cwm y Cae, over Craig y Cae, to the margin of the crater, and thence to the Goat's Pool. Mynydd pen y Coed consists almost entirely of strata of soft bluish-grey clayslate. The beds which lie in succession below this, and occupy the ground to the edge of the crater, are grauwacke, consisting of coarse blackish-blue slate inclosing concretions of splintery quartz more or less earthy, and compact splintery quartz with imbedded crystals of pyrites, in parts more or less ochrey and cellular, probably from decomposition of the pyrites.
To these succeed beds of quartz-rock differing from the preceding only in being more vitreous, and these last rest upon a bluish-grey quartz-rock rendered porphyritic by a few crystals of felspar.
These beds all rise N.E. by N., but their angle of elevation is continually increasing, and the last bed forms the summit of Craig y Cae. The space from this to the margin of the crater is occupied by alternations, in nearly vertical beds, of soft glossy clay-slate, of coarser slate with ochrey spots and small cells, and of grauwacke with concretions of quartz, in some beds rendered porphyritic by imbedded crystals of felspar as well as quartz. Porphyritic quartzrock also occurs, as well as slaty potstone, that is, slate intimately mixed with steatite. There is also inserted about the middle of this series a single bed of a brownish-grey rock, which effervesces strongly for a short time with acids, and by exposure to weather becomes porous and of a darker brown. It appears to be ferruginous quartz, intimately mixed with carbonate of lime.
The next bed (which forms part of the summit of Cader Idris) is composed of globular concretions a foot or more in diameter, which separate into compact angular pieces. This rock is excessively hard and strongly resists decomposition ; in consequence of which it appears as a ridge or wall, a few feet higher than the adjacent beds. It contains numerous specks of pyrites, and has small roundish prominences on the weathered surface, somewhat resembling the orifices of tubes. In very thin shivers it melts into a black glass, and is probably a trap-rock.
The perpendicular wall of the crater is between 900 and 1000 feet in height, and presents the following series of beds from the top. 
A porphyritic rock, consisting of quartzy compact felspar containing, imbedded, crystals of felspar, and a green matter which decomposes by exposure to weather, leaving cells lined with red oxyd of iron. This bed rises about N.W by N., and is composed of irregular columns from 6 to 14 feet long. It ascends obliquely on the west, to that part of the ridge of the mountain called the Saddle, 2655 feet high, which is overspread with columns similar to those just mentioned, except that they are mostly lying prostrate: it also forms the basin in which the Goat's Pool at the bottom of the crater is contained.
On the northern side of the pool is a kind of mound consisting of a rock composed of chlorite, calcareous spar, quartz and glassy felspar. The calcareous spar is white, or of a dull purplish colour. There are several of these beds; of which the upper is a kind of conglomerate imbedding roundish masses of the same kind of rock, but harder, and with a smaller proportion of calcareous spar, and large angular pieces of slate. Below this is a bed harder and more compact than the former, and arranged in irregular columns like starch. This rests upon a more slaty rock of the same kind.
All these beds decompose by exposure to weather through the decay of the calcareous spar, showing the greater part of the mass to consist of this ingredient: some of the decomposed pieces are very light and spongy, and I presume are the substance which by some persons has been described as cellular lava. The relation of these beds to the columnar porphyry which precedes them I have not been able satisfactorily to make out in this place; but upon the whole I am inclined to think that they rest upon the porphyry, as this latter rock makes its appearance on the north as well as on the south of them.
These calcareous beds being readily distinguishable from the others among which they occur, I endeavoured to trace their extent. To the east, as far as the ridge of the mountain stretches, the valley in which they ought to be found is so covered with peat bog and with large masses that have fallen from the cliffs above, that I could not examine it with the requisite minuteness: 1 obtained, however, a very good section of the descent northwards from Geygraig(the eastern extremity of the mountain), without finding these beds; and I conclude that they do not exist there. I then examined the foot of the ridge to the west of the crater, and had the satisfaction of finding what I sought below Twrr mawr, one of the points of the mountain 2148 feet high. An inaccessible precipice of irregular columnar shafts occupies the first 700 or 800 feet from the top, which, lower down, breaking into groups or steps, allows of examination. Here I found a columnar porphyry, evidently the same rock as is associated with the calcareous beds at the Goat's Pool. Three of these facades or steps consist of nearly vertical coarsely slaty tables, which are again divided by vertical joints at right angles to the tabular structure, and thus form tolerably regular quadrangular columns. Between every two steps of porphyry lies a bed or step of green calcareous rock disposed in rude irregular columns; and, still lower down, is the same calcareous rock in coarsely slaty beds, resting on hummocks of soft and not very crystalline greenstone, and interstratified with common and indurated slate. The beds rise N.W. at an angle of about 85°.
The point or projection of the mountain next to the west of Twrr mawr is called Mynydd Coeswyn, and presents appearances very similar to those described. The top is slate, resting on a very hard compact porphyritic greenstone in thick curved tabular masses, which are rudely subdivided into rhomboidal columns, the convex side of the curve being outwards. At the foot of the porphyry are beds of common blue slate rising W. by N.; then comes the green calcareous rock, imbedding angular pieces of slate; then nearly vertical beds of a heavy black slate; then imperfectly slaty grey schist; then beds of the green calcareous rock in which the general slaty structure may be seen at a little distance, but also passing into the large lenticular and obscurely columnar structure. These latter beds rest immediately on columnar greenstone; which at the plane of junction, but no where else, incloses or has involved masses of the calcareous rock, so cellular as to appear like large sponges.
A very remarkable mountain (the name of which I could not discover, and which I therefore for distinction's sake call the Stony Mountain) extends for about two miles parallel to Cader Idris, forming the northern boundary of the little valley in which the Goat's Pool and another small lake are situated. The height of it is about 1700 feet, and it is distinguished from most others in its neighbourhood by several characters. On looking towards Cader Idris from Dolgelle, the white roundish crags of this mountain are very conspicuous; and their height is such, that only one peak of Cader Idris appears beyond and above them. On a nearer examination it is found to be composed of rounded tubercular crags and hemispherical bosses of trap, like enormous ovens, rising group above group, the intervals between which are filled up with coarse pasture and bog. The surface of the bosses is comparatively smooth, and generally reticulated by veins of quartz usually not more than half an inch thick; some of them, however, are considerably wider; and areas occur occasionally, four or five yards across, of white massive quartz several inches thick, with an obscurely slaty structure adhering to the surface of the trap. Many of the groups, when seen in profile, appear to be of a very irregular and thick slaty structure; but, when viewed in front or looking down upon them, are evidently clusters of columns laterally aggregated and intersected by oblique irregular joints. The columnar structure is remarkably perfect on the northern side of the mountain, where terraces of columns sloping towards the body of the mountain, (each terrace in succession retired behind the lower one,) present a flight of enormous steps, and show this remarkable character of the trap-rocks in great perfection. The base of each group generally consists of slaty greenstone and porphyritic slate surrounding the group, and rising up to it on all sides, and therefore evidently a member of this trap formation. On the slaty greenstone rests a bed of highly indurated siliceous schist, which like the other regular strata rises N. by E. or W.
On the south side of the mountain may be seen the connection of the green calcareous rock with those just mentioned: its lowest bed rests on a porphyritic grauwacke, and this latter on a slaty greenstone.
About half way between Dolgelle, and the Stony Mountain, on the Towyn road, is a large quarry of syenite. It is composed of green hornblende intimately mixed with compact felspar, and is rendered porphyritic by concretions of lamellar flesh-red felspar. It is traversed by numerous veins of quartz, in which are imbedded fibres and curved crystals of pale wine-yellow thallite. On the S.W. flank of this syenite are applied nearly vertical beds of schist running about N.W. and S.E. Those beds that immediately rest on the syenite are considerably indurated, the others are less so. Beds of potstone are found very near the schist, and probably interstratified with it. The northern side of the syenite is covered by a soft dark green steatitical rock obscurely slaty, on which rest beds of a green slaty rock not very different from the former, and these are covered by beds of soft blue slate: all these beds rise at a high angle S.E., that is, towards the nucleus of syenite; and the green steatitical beds are penetrated by veins of quartz and thallite, stained green by carbonate of copper.
The descent northwards from Geygraig, the eastern extremity of Cader Idris, also shows in a very interesting manner the connection of the trap with the stratified beds. The south-western part of the flat surface of Geygraig is covered by peat, so as to conceal the subjacent rock; but the north-eastern end consists of a few beds of unaltered blue slate, to which succeed beds of schist disturbed in position, in some places indurated, in others cellular; and in every part containing imbedded lumps of very hard porphyritic greenstone: sometimes the schist contains numerous small glands of quartz and of felspar, and is largely mixed with siliceous schistus of a dull green colour. This rests on highly inclined beds of a porphyritic slate, and this latter on imperfect amygdaloid, which itself rests on the columnar basaltiform trap.
On descending from Geygraig to Dolgelle by the edge of the valley of the Aren, first occur craggy hummocks of massive trap more or less columnar, surrounded by slaty trap in mantle-shaped strata, and covered in different parts by beds of a shining micaceous clay-slate. Near Dolgelle the river flows over beds alternately slaty and massive; the former are distinctly steatitical, and will probably be considered as potstone; the latter differ from them in being harder an'd consisting of a larger proportion of quartz. Sometimes they contain carbonate of lime, and then effervesce briskly for a short time with acids.
On tracing up the Dolgelle river, the Ynnion, for a few miles towards Bala, no rock occurs in situ except massive crystalline greenstone; but on turning to the N. up a small lateral valley, I found beds of the same kind of rock as appear at Dolgelle in the bed of the Aren, some of which are sufficiently calcareous to burn into a reddish-brown sandy lime, and which therefore may perhaps be called limestone: it contains no organic remains. Beds very similar to these, and in all probability a continuation of them, appear at the foot of the hill at Llaneltid bridge over the Mawddach, on the road from Dolgelle to Barmouth, where they rise N.W. at an angle of about 20°, and form the upper members of a series of the grauwacke formation, composed of common blue slate, of finely foliated grey slate more or less calcareous, and of coarse green slate. These slaty beds alternate with sandstone consisting chiefly of quartz, in grains varying from a very minute size to that of hazle-nut«, intermixed with calcareous spar, the whole cemented together partly by quartz and partly by carbonate of lime. This sandstone, in the lower beds, is less calcareous, and mixed more or less with scales of slate; it also by exposure to weather splits into masses somewhat like starch, which stand nearly at right angles to their planes of stratification.
From the facts above detailed, it will I think be evident, that Cader Idris and the ground between that mountain and the Mawddach, as well as the northern boundary of the valley, consist of various well-known transition rocks rising in general N. by E. or W.: that the beds both at the northern and southern extremities are at low angles not greater than 20°; that the intermediate beds are at high angles approaching to vertical; that they rest upon and are interrupted by trap-rocks more or less columnar; that the traprocks themselves are surrounded in many places by mantle-form strata, which in some instances are obviously of the same materials as the trap, and differ only in structure,—but which sometimes bear a less obvious resemblance to the trap; and, from exhibiting transitions from that rock to those which compose the regular strata, are probably the latter, more or less changed by contiguity with the trap.
