XVIII.—On the Strata of the Plastic Clay Formation exhibited in the Cliffs between Christchurch Head, Hampshire, and Studland Bay, Dorsetshire. 
BY CHARLES LYELL, ESQ. P.R.S. P.L.S. F.G.S.
[Read March 17th, 1826.]
1 HE range of coast between Christchurch (or Hengistbury Head), near Muddiford in Hampshire, and the southern side of Studland Bay in Dorsetshire, is nearly 17 miles in length. It presents fewer geological phaenomena of interest than its extent might have led us to expect; but a detailed examination of these Cliffs serves to complete the history of our Southern Coast, of which so large a portion is now illustrated by memoirs published in the Transactions of the Geological Society.
The strata about to be described belong exclusively to the plastic clay formation; and it is necessary to premise that the uppermost bed of this formation is seen to the East of Muddiford. In an account of the strata between Hordwell Cliff and Muddiford, published in the last volume of the Society's Transactions, Mr. Webster has referred the sand that rises from beneath the London Clay at the western extremity of Highcliff, about a mile to the East of Muddiford, to the plastic clay-formation. In this sand he observed fragments of lignite, and branches and leaves of plants. Not far from the spot where it rises, it is cut off by denudation, the valley of the Stour and Avon here reaching the coast; and the interval between this and Muddiford is covered up with gravel and blown sand. A great quantity of fossil wood retaining the woody fibre in a remarkably perfect state is thrown up by the sea on the beach at Muddiford, and indicates an abundance of these remains in the strata there, acted upon by the powerful current that sets in round Christchurch Head. The force of this current carries away the materials brought down into the estuary of the Stour and Avon, and entirely prevents at Muddiford that gain of land so common at the mouths of rivers. In the bottom of the valley higher up, between Muddiford and Christchurch, the river has deposited a bed of alluvial mud. The junction of the rivers Stour and Avon takes place about half a mile below Christchurch, which is situated two miles inland from Muddiford. There is a shifting bar of sand at the mouth of the harbour at Muddiford, rendering the river so shallow that it can be forded at low water during summer. Vessels drawing more than five feet water cannot enter. Although there is no accumulation of alluvial gained land at the mouth of the Stour and Avon, Muddiford stands on sand evidently thrown up by the sea, and a trifling accession of soil is derived from this source. The ancient low cliff is now clearly seen a few hundred yards inland, on the north of the village, and the ancient sea-beach at its base forms the present road.
For the space of more than a mile from the mouth of the Stour and Avon to the east point of Christchurch Head, are hills of blown sand, through which the storm of November 1824 broke with great violence. The subjacent strata are entirely concealed along this shore, and there are no means of filling up this chasm in the section: but before arriving at the east point of Christchurch Head a line of ferruginous sandstone concretions is seen on the beach, running out to sea in a direction E. S. E. (See PI. XXX. No. 1. a.) At Christchurch Head the regular section of the strata is first resumed after the interruption caused by the valley of the Stour and Avon. The strata then are as follows, beginning with the uppermost:—1st. Flint gravel, varying between the east and west points of the Head, from 5 to 20 feet. 2dly. A very fine whitish sand, varying in thickness from 8 to 20 feet. This sand, crops out a little to theW. of West Point. (Pl.XXX. No. 1. b.) 3dly. Sand and loam varying in colour, generally greenish or grayish blue, in parts yellowish, or brown, and often darkened by bituminous matter. (PI. XXX. No. I.e.) In these beds of sand and loam are concretions of ferruginous sand, not unlike those of the lower greensand or Shanklin beds, and others of clay-ironstone, resembling considerably in appearance the clay-ironstone of the coal-formation: black flint pebbles occur in some parts of the sand and loam, and sometimes in the concretions. Parallel layers of these concretions, separated by beds of sand many feet in thickness, first appear at the East Point, and increase from 2 to 5 in number as the strata rise towards the West Point. They are very conspicuous, as the concretions are large, and stand out from the cliffs in relief, the soft sand being removed from around them.
A quantity of bituminized wood, and sometimes large flattened trunks of trees occur in the concretions. One of these trees which I measured, was four feet long and two and a half in circumference. The bark or external coat of this fossil plant consisted of a black shining coal about a quarter of an inch thick, the interior being filled with clay-ironstone. There is a large percentage of iron in some of these concretionary masses; and as exportation from hence by water must always have been easy, it is probable that the ore used in the ancient iron-works of the Mine Way, at the eastern extremity of Hordwell Cliff, near Muddiford, was procured from this part of the cliff. On the summit of this promontory of Christchurch Head, are pits, from whence ironstone has been extracted in former times, but perhaps for the purpose of building; for some of the late repairs of the church at Christchurch have shown that these concretions were used in filling up the foundations. This series of strata of sand, loam and ferruginous concretions, is more than 20 feet in thickness where it first rises at the East Point of Christchurch Head; and, before its outcrop about three quarters of a mile beyond the West Point, it attains, in parts, the thickness of 50 feet. The apparent dip of the strata in the cliffs is to the East; but the real dip may differ from this, as tranverse sections cannot be obtained. The cliffs of this promontory and to the west of it at the outcrop of the above strata, vary in height from about 40 to above 70 feet. The next bed that rises is a black bituminous clay with lignite (PI. XXX. No. 1. d.), which is about 12 feet in thickness, and rests on a layer of round black flints. The lignite with which the beach at the West Point is strewed, is probably washed from this bed. Below this, a bed of reddish brown chocolate-coloured sand rises (PI. XXX. No. 1. e.), inclosing occasional flint pebbles, about four feet thick and resting on a layer of small flint pebbles. Below this is a bed of coal-black bituminous matter, varying from three to four feet in thickness. (PI. XXX. No. 1. f.) Then a stratum of reddish brown sand rises five feet thick. (PI. XXX. No. 1. g.) The variety and contrast of the colours of the above strata remind the geologist of the section of Alum Bay. These beds cannot easily be traced far, as they vary in colour rapidly and pass into each other. The bituminous beds in particular, from containing less vegetable matter in parts, change suddenly their appearance. The cliffs become low after the outcrop of these strata, as will be seen by the section, till near a place called Double Ditches, about three miles from Muddiford, the cliff is only 17 feet in height. Here 12 feet of diluvium is seen at the top, and below it five feet of while sand. (PI. XXX. No. 1. g.)
At Double Ditches the cliff is about 15 feet high, entirely composed of diluvium covered with blown sand. The cliff continues very low for a mile bevond Double Ditches, consisting of diluvium from 8 to 10 feet thick, covered with blown sand from 3 to 5 feet deep. Agriculture in the neighbourhood of the coast between this spot and Boscomb suffers much by this covering of blown sand. At the foot of the low cliff above mentioned the regular strata are seen at a few points; first white sand with ferruginous yellow streaks, then, at a place called White. Pits, reddish brown clay (PI. XXX. No. 1. h.), then, sand with much vegetable matter. Beyond this to the westward is white sand at intervals, with layers of white decomposed flints extremely light. About a mile beyond White Pits, a bed of sand containing much bituminous matter is seen at the foot of the low cliffs, after which the cliffs rise again to 40, and soon after to 60 feet in height. The cliffs, when they first rise, consist of white and yellow sand 18 feet thick, and white sand below with a brown thinly laminated clay 10 feet thick (PI. XXX. No. 1. i.); the whole capped with 12 feet of gravel.
From this point to the Flag-house near the mouth of Pool Harbour, a distance of about 8 miles, the section presented by the cliffs is continued so precisely in the line of bearing of the strata, that no new beds rise up; and it is unnecessary to describe it in detail. It will be seen by the accompanying section that the cliffs are intersected by numerous valleys and chines, the principal of which are Boscomb Chine and Bourn Mouth. The prevailing character of the strata throughout this extent of coast is fine white sand; but yellowish and pinkish beds of sand occur, and thinly laminated clays in great abundance, resembling in appearance many of the light coloured argillaceous marls of Montmartre near Paris: but in none could I discover any organic remains, except vegetable impressions, and these very indistinct. The lower sands of this series are frequently ash-coloured, apparently from the admixture of vegetable matters, with which they are charged very irregularly, and they consequently often change colour suddenly. Black bituminous clays are sometimes associated with the ash-coloured sand ; as for instance to the east of Boscomb Chine, where, in the lower part of the cliff, ash-coloured sand 15 feet thick appears, with 25 feet of black clay below it. Similar dark beds occur to the east of Bourn Mouth. The following is the section of the cliffs at "The Chines" near Boscomb Chine.
Pipe-clay is seen in a few spots, as at the foot of the cliff to the east of Boscomb, and west of Big Durly Chine. I was informed also that pipe-clay was worked in the interior near Bourn Mouth. Alum sometimes effloresces from some of the clays associated with the white sand where they contain pyrites.
This series of sands, clays, and argillaceous marls, is nowhere exposed to view, so that the entire thickness of the whole cannot be accurately estimated; but it is not less than 150 feet. The cliffs vary occasionally in height, but except where interrupted by chines and valleys, they are rarely less than 60, and appear never to exceed 130 feet. The inclination' of the beds is slight, but in the sections in some of the Chines a slight dip to the north is seen. Gentle curves and undulations in the strata are not uncommon, as about a mile east of Boscomb, and between Boscomb Chine and Bourn Mouth. The strata of sand are not always conformable; and this unconformability has arisen from irregularities attending their original deposition, and not from any subsequent disturbances or slips. The diluvium covering this line of cliffs varies from 10 to above 40 feet in thickness, and is chiefly composed of flint-gravel. Sand, however, is in some parts intermixed, and often interstratified with considerable regularity.
After passing Bateman's Chine and the cliff on which the Flag-house stands, the section is interrupted by the mouth of Pool Harbour, and the bar of sand on each side of it, for a space of about two miles and a half. The section is resumed near Studland; but the strata are not continuously exposed, and the junction of the plastic clay-formation and the chalk is very imperfectly exhibited. First, at a spot a few hundred yards to the north of Studland, in a sloping inland cliff protected from the sea by alow sand-bank, yellow and purple sands are seen, and in a few spots, pipe-clay. Nearly opposite the village of Studland, where the section first becomes distinct, the following strata occur, beginning with the uppermost.
This last bed strikingly resembles some of the ferruginous sand of the Shanklin beds containing similar ferruginous concretions in balls, or, as in the Isle of Wight and Sussex, in long tubes 6 feet (See PI. XXX. No. 1.1.). Proceeding towards thechalk,we find the cliff occupiedby sands mottled with white, yellow, and purple (PI. XXX. No. 1. m.). These cliffs are sometimes very beautifully marked with concentric stains, exactly imitating the transverse and oblique sections of trunks of trees; and the sand often passes into sandstone.
These beds are about 25 feet in thickness. All these strata opposite Studland are irregular and curved; and if the cliffs were more continuous, more vertical and elevated, they would probably be seen to be contorted like the strata of the same formation in White Cliff Bay, in the Isle of Wight. The section between this and the chalk is very imperfect, the slanting cliffs being covered with vegetation, pipe-clay (PI. XXX. No. 1. o.) and white sand (PI. XXX. No.l. n.) are seen at intervals. The junction of the chalk and sands is buried under a mass of debris; but fragments of a breccia of flint, imbedded in a ferruginous cement, are observed immediately above the chalk. Mr. Mantell has pointed out a similar breccia to me in the beds of plastic clay resting on the chalk near Seaforth in Sussex, where the imbedded flint pebbles have a green coating. I have observed these green pebbles in situ immediately over the chalk in the North of Hampshire, and the green pebbles strewed over the chalk near Croydon are probably derived from a bed similarly situated.
Beneath the ferruginous breccia, the chalk for two feet is a. soft marl, and minutely striated with yellow and white lines, occasioned perhaps by stains derived from the breccia. The upper chalk with flints then appears dipping gently to the north. The Old Harry Rocks, which are detached masses of chalk, standing out in the sea like the Needles in the Isle of Wight, are not above half a mile distant from this point. I found no animal remains in any stratum between Christchurch Head and Studland Bay; and although a more careful investigation may detect some, they must certainly be rare. The argillaceous strata of Alum Bay, which contain shells, are probably concealed here at some of the interruptions of the section. But the absence of animal and the abundance of vegetable remains are characteristic, both here and on the continent, of the plastic clay or lignite-formation. They are no less characteristic of the ancient coal-formation ; and it is also singular, with respect to these two formations of dates so widely different, that the proofs of their origin, whether freshwater or marine, have been considered equivocal. In the ancient coal-formation, as is well known, remains decidedly marine have been found, but never abundantly nor in all coal-fields, while shells of apparently freshwater genera have been often found. In France the plastic clay-formation is usually destitute of organic remains; but as lymnaeas and planorbes have been discovered in some localities, it is there generally considered as a freshwater formation. The shells of the plastic clay of this country are decidedly marine. Yet none who have compared the beds of plastic clay and lignite resting on the chalk, in France, can doubt their analogy to our own. Neither do such variances oppose any irreconcileable difficulties to the connection of these formations; nor are the variations in the freshwater or saltwater character of the shells inconsistent with the supposition that the various beds belong to a contemporaneous formation, which their relative position, their organic remains and mineralogical characters, indicate. If this series of strata was originally deposited in friths, estuaries, or in shallow seas, the phaenomena are such as might be expected.
Diluvium. 
The diluvium which covers the cliffs between Christchurch Head and the mouth of Pool Harbour, consists chiefly, as I have observed, of flint-gravel; but in some parts layers of sand are interstratifled with considerable regularity. The flints have been derived from the chalk; they are broken and partly rounded, but a great portion retain much of their original form and of the white coating peculiar to chalk flints. They do not appear to have been ever subject to the continued action of the waves; and there is a striking difference between the appearance of the flints in the diluvium, and the shingle composed of round pebbles on the beach below, though the latter is formed of the same materials. This remarkable bed of flint-gravel, sometimes 50 feet or more in thickness, is strewed uniformly over the several formations which occupy the cliffs between the eastern extremity of Hordwell Cliff and the mouth of Pool Harbour. There is no observable difference between the characters of this diluvium, whether it covers the lower freshwater formation, the London clay, or plastic clay. The only spot in which an exception occurs, is at the western end of High Cliff, where the sand of the plastic clay first rises below the London clay. At this point the section is as follows, beginning at the top:—
The difference in the nature of the diluvium in this place is doubtless connected with the formation of the valley of the Stour and Avon; for it is the eastern slope of this valley which is here intersected by the coast section. The chines or small valleys between Christchurch Head and the mouth of Pool Harbour are hollowed out of strata composed of soft materials, as clayloam and fine sand. The size of the valleys is in general in proportion to that of the streams flowing in them, and their excavation appears referable for the most part, if not entirely, to the long continued agency of these streams. It is impossible not to draw this conclusion, when we observe the power exerted at present by several small rills, which have divided the cliffs in some places where their height is greatest, by perpendicular fissures or narrow ravines, the sides of which still remain vertical, because the water constantly undermines them and removes the loose sand, clay, and gravel.
