XXVI.—Description of Fossil Remains of some Animals from the North-East Border of Bengal. 
BY J. B. PENTLAND, ESQ. (In a Letter to W. H. FITTON, M.D. P.G.S.)
[Read May 2nd, 1828.]
MY DEAR SIR, 
THE researches in which I am at present engaged, having induced me to make some inquiries connected with the geological structure of the great mountain chains of our Asiatic empire, I was naturally led to examine the numerous and interesting series of Indian rocks in the Museum of the Geological Society.
My attention was particularly arrested by a collection of specimens fromCaribari in the small state of Cooch-behar, on the banks of the Brahm-putra river, presented by Mr. Colebrooke, and described in his very interesting paper on the Geology of the N.E. border of Bengal,—since they afford the first example of the discovery of an extinct race of Mammalia in the great extent of Southern Asia; and at the same time furnish decisive proofs of the existence of tertiary marine deposits, perfectly identical in geological and zoological characters with those which cover so great a proportion of continental Europe and of our own island.
Among the mutilated fragments of bones referable to the order of Mammalia from the tertiary deposits of the Brahm-putra, I have succeeded in discovering the remains of four distinct species: viz. 1. One species of the genus Anthracotherium of Cuvier; 2. A small species of Ruminant allied to the genus Moschus; 3. A small species of herbivorous animal referable to the order Pachydermata, but more diminutive than any of the fossil or living species; and 4. A carnivorous animal of the genus Viverraf.
1. The Anthracotherium of Caribari, in the form of its molares, possesses the characters belonging to the rest of the genus; but although some of the fragments which I have examined belong to a full-grown individual, the animal must have been one-third smaller than the lesser species discovered in the tertiary formations of central France, and of Cadibona near Genoa. We may therefore conclude that it forms a new species, to be added to the two already known, of the genus Anthracotherium; and I propose therefore to establish it as such under the name of Anthracotherium Silistrense, a specific denomination derived from one of the many names by which the great Brahm-putra river appears to have been designated by ancient geographers.
Mr. Colebrooke having already pointed out the analogies which exist between the deposits of Caribari and those of this island, it becomes unnecessary for me to enter into any detail respecting the other animal remains imbedded in them. I shall merely observe, that they present us with the same association of organized remains which accompanies the tertiary strata of Europe, in which extinct genera of the Pachydermata have been discovered; and that the marine shells found along with them are identical in genera, if not in species, with those which characterize the most modern antediluvian formations,—those described by MM. Cuvier and Brongniart under the title of upper marine formation in the Paris basin, and to which are to be referred the extensive marine deposits encircling the shores of the Mediterranean, which cover the less elevated countries of central Europe, and which appear to extend, as far as the Lake of Aral, into the interior of the continent of Asia.
The tertiary deposits of Caribari appear to form a band at the base of the Thibetian mountains, since we find them extending to Silhet, where they contain nummulites similar to those imbedded in the modern limestone of the pyramids; and of frequent occurrence in the tertiary calcareous rocks of northern Italy. How far the same formation may be prolonged in a southerly direction along the peninsulas of Malacca and of Hindoostan, it is impossible to say, although we possess proofs of its existence at Madras, where it contains the same species of shells as on the Brahm-putra; and at Pondicherry, where it envelops the great masses of silicified wood found near that city.
I may hereafter take an opportunity of presenting to the Society some further observations on this interesting subject. In the mean time I trust that you will receive this communication (which my occupations at this moment have prevented me rendering more detailed) with your usual indulgence; and not without some interest as connected with the recent discovery of gigantic remains of animals of the same order in another part of India.
Believe me, my dear Sir, With great truth, yours very faithfully,
J. B. PE.NTLAND. W. H. FITTON, Esq. M.D. P.G.S. &c. &c.
