XXI.—Notices and Extracts from the Minute-Booh of the Geological Society. 
1.—Notice respecting the Appearance of Fossil Timber on the Norfolk Coast. By Richard Taylor, Esq. F.G.S. [Read Dec. 2nd, 1825.]
THE extraordinary high tide which visited the coast of Norfolk on the 5th of February last, swept away considerable portions of the cliffs throughout their course on the eastern side of the county, to the no small injury of the property exposed to its attacks, and, for some weeks, afforded an unusually favourable opportunity of examining the geological phenomena of this coast. The tremendous effects produced by a sea elevated many feet above the highest level recorded, and agitated by a strong gale blowing full upon the shore, were accelerated by the remarkable wetness of the soil. So completely were the high grounds along the eastern coast previously saturated by the land springs, that daily avalanches, or "shoots" as they are provincially termed, had occurred during the winter. Many of these shoots consisted of enormous masses of clay, mud and sand, from 100 to 200 feet in thickness, which overspread the beach with their debris and prevented all passage below, except at extreme low water; and formed an inaccessible barrier, in some cases several hundred yards in depth, for some miles along the shore, between Cromer and Mundesley. The most remarkable fall occurred in the preceding month; when a portion of the Lighthouse Cliff at Cromer, at the point where it exhibits an almost perpendicular face of 250 feet, suddenly disengaged itself, and was followed by a considerable rush of water from the rear of the fallen mass. The materials of this extensive avalanche now form a promontory, occupying twelve acres, projecting many yards into the sea. As might be expected, its surface presents a rugged and shattered appearance, such as can be only compared to the effects of an earthquake. It may be here observed, that the lower portion of the fallen cliff was projected further than the upper part; a circumstance only to be explained by observing that the water having passed freely through the sand of the upper half of the cliff accumulated in considerable quantities in the rear of the tenacious blue clay of the lower half, until by its weight and pressure, added to that of the substratum, the base was forced forwards about three hundred yards from its former site.
In consequence of the extensive denudation of the cliffs, I obtained an opportunity of examining the site of a number of fossil trees, occurring in a stratum which I had previously traced several miles; and these were particularly exposed at Cromer, both on the east and west side of the town. I was also enabled minutely to observe this singular stratum of wood during the operation of excavating the foundations of a sea wall of unusual dimensions, whereby I intersected about two hundred feet in length, and removed a great number of trees and stumps.
Thi3 subterranean forest occupies, in general, a bed about four feet in thickness, composed of numerous laminae of clay, sand, and vegetable remains; the whole mass varying much in colour and density, according to the prevalence of ferruginous or of vegetable matter. The trunks were found to stand as thickly as is usual in woods, and consistently with their proper growth. These stumps are firmly rooted in what appears the original soil on which they grew; but they are invariably broken off about a foot and a half from the base. The stems and branches lie scattered horizontally; amongst which are thin layers and cakes of decomposed leaves, but no fruits or seed-vessels were noticed. The species of timber appear to be confined chiefly to the pine tribe, with occasional specimens of elm and oak. They are all flattened by the pressure of the overlying alluvial strata.
I am not positive of the occurrence of any animal remains, except in one instance, when I disengaged from this stratum a portion of the skull of an animal of the deer tribe. The bones of elephants and other herbivorous animals are not uncommonly found near this site, and may have been washed out of the same bed.
The general level of the stratum on which are placed the stumps of trees so far as I have traced them, is a few feet above high-water mark: although it frequently inclines as much below, and is concealed by the loose sand of the beach. At Cromer it occurs beneath 60 to 100 feet of alluvial deposits. At the base of Paston Hill the bed, containing large stumps of trees, sustains the pressure of near 200 feet of sand, gravel and clay. Nearer Happisburgh, at Bacton Gap, it occurs with only 10 feet of superincumbent loam reposing upon it. The extreme points at which I have identified this interesting stratum are about 20 miles asunder; and throughout this extent it may be considered as continuous.
The geological fact which I have taken the liberty of thus noticing is probably not altogether new, yet is entitled to some consideration, as illustrative of the former surface of this portion at least of the coast. That the stratum alluded to was the actual superficial soil, upon which grew and flourished an extensive forest of oaks and pines, and on which the deer, the elephant, and other herbivorous animals existed and died, there can be little doubt. Upon this surface, once comparatively level, have been piled irregular accumulations of alluvium, varying from 10 to 300 feet in thickness. There is no reason to doubt that the submarine forest which exists on the Norfolk coast, further northward, and which passes by the Lincolnshire coast to Yorkshire, is a continuation of the same stratum, on a somewhat lower level.
There is a striking similarity of appearance in all parts of this line. Numerous stumps of trees are perceptible at Thornham and Brancaster, standing evidently upon the original surface, whilst the trunks and branches cover the ground, in a horizontal direction. In general this wood is quite soft and decomposed, but contrary instances are not uncommon; and I have cut off fragments from the oak stumps, which though not mineralized, were so hard as almost to defy the edge of a hatchet. I cannot speak with certainty of any point in the central parts of this county where this woody stratum can be identified. Peaty valleys, with trunks of trees and stags' horns, are not unfrequent (and, among these, the Valley of Waveney is particularly to be noticed); but they probably have a different and distinct origin.
Cromer Terrace, March 31, 1825.
2.—Description of a peculiar Species of Granite. In a Letter from Earl Compton, to the Rev. Professor Buckland, P.G.S.  [Read Nov. 18th, 1825.]
My DEAR SIR, THE subject of my present letter may perhaps be interesting to the Geological Society, and if you think so, I shall be obliged to you to communicate it to them; it will at least show, that though at a distance, they have not passed from my memory.—I have been employed for the last month in an excavation at Tivoli, in a spot where the villa of Manlius Vopiscus, described by the poet Statius, is supposed to have stood. This point is, however, disputed; and I cannot say that my excavation has produced any decisive evidence to prove its truth, though there appears to me to be increased reason to believe it. I will not however say any thing more upon that head, as I hope next spring to renew my research; but I will hasten at once to the principal object of this communication.—In the course of our excavating, we found a considerable number of fragments of a rock, which is, as far as I can learn, entirely new, among those employed by the ancients. I have inquired of several of the principal lapidaries of Rome, and they all say that they never saw or heard of it before, as found among ancient ruins. This rock is green granite; that is to say, granite, the felspar of which is of a green colour, and exactly resembling that which is commonly called Amazonian stone. The fragments which I have found have been generally small, and some very small; the largest is about the size of a small melon. I have consulted the only two mineralogical works which I have with me, "Allan's Synonymes," and "Jameson's System of Mineralogy." In the former, Siberia is the only locality mentioned for green felspar. Jameson (2nd edition, vol. i. pages 375, 376.) states that it is found in a vein in granite, in the government of Ubinsky, in the Uralian mountains; also in contemporaneous masses in the granite of Onega; and further, that it is found in small rolled pieces on the banks of the river of Amazons. It would be interesting to know from whence the ancients derived it; as its two Siberian localities must have been little more accessible than that in the undiscovered continent of America. In endeavouring to ascertain this point, we are not entirely without a glimmering of light, as on some of these fragments, which show their original surface, there are Egyptian hieroglyphics. This circumstance induces me to suppose that green granite must have been found, though as a very rare substance, in Egypt. What these masses were, when the villa of Vopiscus was standing, it is useless to inquire; and perhaps future excavations may settle that point. By the largest mass which I had the good fortune to find, it appears that quartz was the principal constituent of the green granite; the felspar was however pretty abundant, and the mica disseminated in very small proportions, and of a black colour. In one fragment are some appearances of black acicular crystals in the quartz, probably either hornblende, or tourmaline.
Accompanying this letter, I send five specimens;—one, of which I have had a surface polished, will you be so kind as to give in my name to the Geological Society? I also send for the Geological Society a small specimen of a decomposing red slaty mineral, which I found in my excavation, and with which I am unacquainted. It appears to have formed part of a cornice.
Believe me, my dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
COMPTON. Rome, May 20th, 1825.
3.—Translation of a Letter from Mons. de Gimbernat, of Geneva, to G. B. Greenough, Esq. V.P.G.S.  [Read April 7th, 1826.]
SIR, THE sulphate of soda which I have the honour to send to you, and which I request you to present to the Geological Society of London, was discovered in the gypsum which is worked by means of two galleries at a quarter of a league from Muhligen, on the left bank of the Reuss in the Canton of Argovie. I found this crystallized amorphous salt most abundantly in the northern gallery. Having observed saline efflorescences in a mass of gypsum near a mill where that substance is reduced to powder, I had the curiosity to examine the quarry from whence it was extracted, and I there saw by lamp light, that the recent fractures were studded with sparkling layers, as in mines of rock salt. I perceived by the taste that these crystals were sulphate of soda, and that the white powder spread over the walls of the gallery was the same salt which had effloresced, losing its water of crystallization by contact with the atmosphere. The length of the gallery is about 320 feet, breadth 6, and average height about 13 feet. From its entrance on the banks of the Reuss to the present works, several beds of compact gypsum were traversed; these beds were granular, shelly, of a grayish white colour, and void of salt. Jn the beginning of this year some saline beds were cut through, which were below those above mentioned: but the country people, who work this gypsum on their own account, paid no attention to the discovery; so that the existence of native sulphate of soda in Argovie was unknown at Aarau in May 1825; when I sent specimens of it to the Society of Natural Sciences of the Canton, with a notice upon the position of the salt, and containing hints as to the mode of working it advantageously. However, as a manufacture of sulphate of soda by the decomposition of sea-salt had just been established at Aarau, little importance was attached to this discovery, nor to the instructions for quarrying the salt, the advantages of which will be probably lost, owing to the bad management of the present works, which are conducted on principles contrary to all the rules of mining.
There are three beds of secondary gypsum interspersed with crystallized sulphate of soda, and separated by a thin deposit of foliaceous marl containing the same salt, but in less quantity than the gypsum. The 1st or upper bed is three feet thick, the 2nd five feet, and the 3rd (which is little cut into) presents a section of two feet. Thus this saliferous formation is at least ten feet thick; the depth is unknown, the beds being nearly vertical.
In stating that the salt is there disseminated, it must be understood that it is not found in ridges (en sillons), nor in beds alternating with the gypsum, but that it is of contemporaneous formation with that rock. It is found in crystalline laminae of several lines of thickness (and not in grains nor in regular crystals), filling up the fissures of the gypsum, and also the interior of that rock without regularity. It appears, nevertheless, that the sulphate of soda is disseminated in a direction parallel to the stratification of the gypsum; for the fracture of the rock in that direction exposes more of the salt than a transverse fracture.
The co-existence of sulphate of lime and sulphate of soda in the same rock, is as remarkable as the binary union of sulphuric acid with those bases in the glauberite, which is composed of those two sulphates in nearly equal proportions and in intimate union. In the gypsum of Muhligen, on the contrary, this double combination takes place separately, the two sulphates being associated, but without chemical mixture,—since there is not an atom of lime in the sulphate of soda, nor an atom of that alkali in the sulphate of lime. They are so separated, although forming an integrant part of the same rock, that it is easy to detach crystals of sulphate of soda from the gypsum, to which their adherence is very feeble;—a surprising circumstance, if we consider them to have been dissolved together and to have received solidity at the same time. It is difficult to conceive how the integrant molecules of the sulphates of lime and soda have not been intimately united in this rock, as in the glauberite,— a difference which perhaps depends upon the proportions.
This sulphate of soda is not, however, without mixture; for it contains a little iron and hydrochlorate of soda, which is attested by the bluish tint produced by the hydrocyanite of potash, and the flocculent heavy precipitate formed by the nitrate of silver.
Mr. Frey of Aarau, a skilful chemist to whom I sent a pound of the salt, analysed it by order of the cantonal society of Argovie. He has not merely proved the presence of the two salts, but he has determined their proportions per cent as follows:—
The quantity of this salt contained in the gypsum cannot be determined, because it is strewed over the beds very unequally. The experiments which I have made have given me different proportions, from 4 to 10 per cent. The property which sulphate of soda possesses, of losing its water of crystallization upon contact with air. makes it impossible to preserve specimens of the gypsum with crystals of that salt, as the latter effloresces and conveys (par epigynie) the incorrect idea of a saline formation. I only succeeded in preserving them from falling into powder, by inclosing them, at the moment of their removal from the gypsum, in tubes or glass phials well corked.
The range of this saliferous formation makes a portion of the southern face of the Jura. It is stratified in beds extending from N.W. to S.E. in an oblique position, at angles varying to 90° rising towards the N.E. The dip of the saliferous gypsum is from 70° to 80°. This formation is the eighth in the series of rocks composing the southern slope of the Jura, beginning with the shelly conchoidal limestone (calcaire conchoide coquille) which constitutes the exterior envelope.
The geognostic description of the Jura not being the object of this notice, I confine my observations to those rocks between which the gypsum and the crystallized sulphate of soda are placed. Their position is between beds of (he same quality of gypsum nearly vertical, and containing no salt, and which overlie other beds of secondary limestone. This last is granular, shelly, cavernous, and without fossils; its stratification is conformable. Above the gypsum is the formation of black aluminous foliaceous marl charged with sulphuret of iron, and having several beds of marly and shelly carbonate of lime alternating.
Mineralogical writers make no mention of sulphate of soda, because that salt has never been found crystallized and in abundance in rocks of any known mountains, (montagnes bien connues,") although it has been met with sometimes mixed with hydrochlorate of soda, and most frequently in volcanoes.
The discovery of its existence in the gypsum of Muhlingen is interesting in a geological point of view, and because it renders henceforward superfluous the hypothesis of Klaproth explanatory of the origin of that salt in mineral waters. That celebrated chemist attributed its presence to the decomposition of hydrochlorate of soda by sulphuric acid disengaged in the bowels of the earth from sulphuret of iron or from the combustion of sulphur. This supposition, although purely imaginary, has been so received, that the scientific Berzelius repeats it in his interesting observations upon the waters of Carlsbad. It is possible that it may some day be confirmed by observation,—without which there is no science; for truth consists in facts, and not in opinions. However, as we now know that crystallized sulphate of soda exists in the heart of the Jura, it is more reasonable to infer that the waters which are charged with that salt, have acquired it in their passage through rocks of the formation of Muhlingen, or others analogous to them.
The probability in favour of this idea approaches to demonstration, from the fact, that the above saliferous formation is the same as that from which flow the thermal waters of Baden and Schinznach, both abounding in the sulphates of soda and lime. Those springs are about a league distant from Muhlingen, the former to the east, the latter to the west, of that place.
A simple and natural explanation of the origin of sulphate of soda in mineral springs is the result of the new discovery which is the subject of this notice; affording also an additional example in favour of the philosophical precept of Bacon :—" Non fingendum, aut excogitandum, sed inveniendum quid Natura ferat aut fiat."
CHARLES DE GIMBERNAT. 
Geneva, September 29th, 1825.
4.—Extract of a Letter from B. de Basterot, Esq. to Dr. Fitton, V.P.G.S. 
[Read Dec. 1, 1826.]
THE attention of geologists having been recently directed in a peculiar manner towards the beds below the chalk, I was glad to have it in my power to examine the strata in the vicinity of Folkstone, about which I had understood there still existed some uncertainty; and I devoted to that purpose a portion of the time, during which I was detained at Dover, at the close of the year 1824.
The beds of white chalk which form the cliffs for some distance on the shore between Dover and Folkstone have been so well described by Mr. Phillips, that I observed there nothing which it is necessary to mention. The gray chalk rises gradually from beneath the white in approaching Folkstone, and the two beds are very closely connected together; but a sort of natural separation is intimated by a copious spring which issues from the cliff about the place of junction. Towards the West of this place the real escarpment retires from the shore, and the cliffs are formed solely by subsided masses of white and gray chalk, the disposition of which sufficiently indicates the presence of an argillaceous stratum beneath, although the latter is no where visible either on the shore above the sea, or among the ruins at the foot of the real escarpment. About a mile from the town of Folkstone I observed for the first time, traces of green-sand among the subsided ruins, in the form of irregular veins and masses, in a sort of chalk marl of a dirty white colour, which includes nodules of a harder substance than the rest, and contains a great number of shells, among which a species of plagiostoma was the most abundant. Immediately after this, the Folkstone blue marl (gault) appears in a low bank along the shore, at the extremity of a valley, which here opens towards the sea; the valley itself being formed on one side by the chalk hills, which rise to the height of nearly 600 feet, and on the other by a range of low hillocks of marl and sandstone, beyond which stands the town of Folkstone.
The real position of the strata at this place is much concealed by the subsidence of the various argillaceous beds of chalk and marl; but after crossing the under-cliff in various directions, I was enabled to trace the following succession:—
b) Marl of a dirty white colour, much mixed with the preceding sand. This bed contains nodules of a more compact texture, and abounds with fossils, though from the soft nature of the marl, their characters are not determinable ;—and it is from hence that the subsided masses already mentioned have come. 4th. The blue marl of Folkstone (gault), containing petrifactions in great variety. The hamites, inoceramus, a particular species of ammonite, and, above all, a small belemnite are characteristic of this bed. 
5th. In fine, thick beds of sand and sandstone full of green particles, and of very coarse texture. I perceived no organic remains in this bed, but could not search for them minutely.
What I have mentioned sufficiently shows, that the Folkstone clay (or gault) is separated from the marly beds of chalk by a stratum of sand and argillaceous marl, abounding in green particles; and is on the other hand itself succeeded, in descending, by the sand and stone also abounding in green particles, which occupy the shore at Folkstone.
