
XXVII.—On the Cycadeoideee, a Family of Fossil Plants found in the Oolite Quarries of the Isle of Portland. 
BY THE REV. WILLIAM BUCKLAND, D.D. F.G.S. P.R.S. F.L.S.
PROFESSOR OF MINERALOGY AND GEOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.
[Read June 6th, 1828.]
ABOUT twenty years ago I saw for the first time specimens of these fossil plants, in the collection of H. H. Henley, Esq. of Sandringham near Lynn. They had been procured by him from the celebrated freestone quarries of the Isle of Portland, where they were known to the workmen by the name of petrified birds-nests, their external form bearing a rude resemblance to the shape and size of a common crow's nest.
My attention has been recalled to this subject by a communication which I received in 1825 from Sir George Grey of Portsmouth, who transmitted to me a similar fossil found also in the Isle of Portland, and permitted me to make the drawings of it represented in Plate XLVII.
On my showing this specimen to Mr. Webster, he informed me that he had presented two similar fossils from Portland to the Geological Society of London. There are also three more specimens in the museum of Mr.Sowerby, two of which he has kindly permitted me to engrave in Plates XLVIII. and XLIX. These specimens are all exclusively from the Isle of Portland.
The mineral condition of these plants is almost entirely siliceous, varying from coarse granular chert to imperfect chalcedony; it resembles that of the petrified trees which abound in Portland and often measure many feet both in length and circumference, in some of which Mr. Brown has recognised the structure of coniferous wood. The limestone adjacent to these trees is itself pervaded by silex, and contains beds and nodules of chert.
On my submitting our new fossils to Mr. Brown and Mr. Loddiges, they immediately recognised a resemblance to the genera Zamia and Cycas, which compose the existing family of Cycadeae, a resemblance which further investigation has tended fully to establish: and as their structure will be best explained by comparison with the recent Zamia and recent Cycas, I have given transverse sections of them both, wherein we find remarkable analogies to the two fossil species we are about to establish f. In the Zamia horrida of the Cape of Good Hope the transverse section exhibits one narrow circle, composed of radiating plates, placed in the cellular substance that forms the stem or body of the plant; and nearly at equal distance between its centre and circumference j, and in a section near the base of Cycas revoluta, we have two narrow circles of radiating plates, placed also in the cellular substance that forms the stem, and both of them nearer to the centre than to the circumference of the plant; the outermost of these circles is the most narrow.
Neither Zamia nor Cycas has any covering of true bark, but the stem is inclosed in a thick case made up of the persistent bases of decayed leaves: each of these terminates externally in a lozenge-shaped impression or scar, the convex surface of which formed the joint from which a leaf had fallen off. A dense and continuous series of these leaf-joints entirely surrounding the stem gives it more the appearance of a pine-apple or enormous fir-cone, than of a vegetable trunk. On comparing these peculiarities of structure with those displayed in our fossil specimens, we recognise a correspondence highly curious and satisfactory. Like the recent Cycadeae, our fossil stems are inclosed in no true bark, but have a thick case made up of the flat persistent bases of decayed leaves, which at their inner extremity touch the cellular tissue of the body of the trunk, and terminate externally in an oblong gibbous joint resembling the leaf-joints of Zamia horrida". These bases of leaves rise upwards, and are most perfect near the summit of the trunk: but lower down, the oldest of them lie horizontally and at right angles to the trunk, which they entirely encircle, and are more and more compressed as they are nearer to the root. In form, position, and structure, as far as it can be recognised, these parts resemble what we find in the recent Cycadeae. As yet no leaves have been found adherent to any of the fossil plants. At the summit of most of them there is a cavity, the contents of which appear to have been removed before petrifaction took place: the relation of this cavity to the trunk and leaves may be seen by comparison with living plants of Zamia horrida, Cycas circinalis, and C. revoluta, referred to in the note f. Although the trunk is so tall in Cycas circinalis as sometimes to exceed thirty feet in height, it rarely attains six feet in Cycas revoluta, and in other species is much shorter. The trunk of many Zamiae is also very short. In the fossil specimens yet discovered, it varies from five inches to a foot in height, and from eight to fifteen inches in diameter. Their different forms will be best understood by referring to the accompanying Plates J. They are generally terminated downwards by a broad flat base without any adherent roots; but traces of the commencement of roots, having a cavity at their centre, are visible in Sir G. Grey's specimen. At the base of other specimens there is only a coarse irregular reticulation, apparently connected with the commencement of roots. The interior of these stems presents two varieties of structure, which we find accompanied respectively by a corresponding variation of external form, size and character, in the bases of the leaves. These differences are sufficient, in the opinion of Mr. Brown, to establish a new family, to which we may refer the two extinct species before us, the one resembling a recent Zamia, the other resembling a recent Cycas; and to which, from its near approximation to the existing family of Cycadeae, the name of Cycadeoidea seems appropriate.
In the largest and most abundant species (Cycadeoidea megalophylla) the bases of the leaves vary from one to three inches in length, having nearly the form and size of those of Zamia horrida, and measuring from one fourth of an inch to an inch in the shorter, and from one to two inches in the longer diameter of their transverse section. The trunk is short and flat, and exhibits a deep cavity at its summit resembling a bird's nest.
The origin and use of this cavity is rendered perfectly intelligible by comparing it with that at the summit of the Cycas revoluta which bore fruit at Farnham in 1799, of which a description and plate are given by Sir J. Smith. This cavity is surrounded with a magnificent crown of leaves, whose stalks are set round its margin like the bases of the leaves in our fossil specimen f. The cavity itself is occupied by a cluster of fronds producing the fruit or drupae; and it is a striking coincidence, that Sir J. Smith, in describing this cavity, makes use of the same comparison (hollow like a bird's nest) which has been applied by the quarry-men at Portland to the fossils I am now associating with the recent Cycadea. In the central cavity of this fossil there are no remains of fronds or fruit, but a convex mass of cellular tissue, which probably formed the support of the proliferous fronds. Where the trunk is broken below the summit J, we find the same central mass of cellular tissue as in the transverse section of the stems of recent Zamia and Cycades.
Near the circumference of both specimens there is a laminated circle as in the trunk of a recent Zamia, but differing in that it is much broader and placed nearer the circumference of the stem: the large and visible plates of this circle, when magnified with a lens§, appear made up of smaller plates almost invisible to the naked eye, more numerous and closer to each other than in the laminated circles of recent Zamia.
Between this radiating circle and the outer case of leaf-stalks, is a narrow band, or ring, of minutely cellular substance, analogous to the similar but much broader band of cellular tissue that divides the radiating circles from the bases of the leaves in the recent Cycadeae.
In the second and smaller species (Cycadeoidea microphylld) the bases of the leaves are also lozenge-shaped and about an inch in length, but small and numerous, much like those of the Xanthorrhoea or gum-plant of New South Wales. The trunk is longer in proportion to its width, whilst its transverse section exhibits at the centre the same indistinctly cellular appearance as the species last described; but near the circumference instead of one it has two laminated circles, and exterior to each of these a narrow band devoid of laminae, analogous to the two bands of cellular substance that are placed in similar relation to the two laminated circles in a recent Cycas H.
These two circles, like the one circle of Cycadeoidea megalophylla, approach the circumference, whilst those in Zamia and Cycas are placed nearer the centre of the stem.
There is also a further analogy between this fossil species and the recent Cycas, viz. that in each case the outermost of the plated circles is the most narrow of the two, and the cellular band between them is in both cases also narrow.
The engraving of Cycas revoluta or Todda Pannaf, copied from Vol. iii. Plate 21. of the Hortus Malabaricus, exhibits many plated circles divided from one another by narrow cellular bands, and these also are placed nearer to the centre than to the circumference of the stem.
It appears, therefore, that the external position and greater breadth of the laminated circle, or circles, in the Cycadeoidea are the two most important distinctions that can be drawn from the specimens before us, between the structure of the stem in these extinct fossils and in the recent Zamia and Cycas. These distinctions also afford a character whereby this family approaches nearer than the Cycadea to the more perfect structure of dicotyledonous woods; and in this respect it may be considered to hold a higher place in the scale of vegetable creation, and to supply from the fossil world a link that helps to fill the distant interval which separates the structure of the trunk in the Cycadeae from that in the nearest existing family to them, viz. the Coniferte, which they perfectly resemble in the character of their organs of fructification. They however exhibit no traces of vessels such as radiate from the centre and form the silver grain in the more perfect kinds of wood.
As yet, the stems of Cycadeoideae have been observed in no other formation than the Portland stone, the geological position of which, in the upper part of the oolite series, is well known from the descriptions of Mr. Webster and of Messrs. Conybeare and Phillips, and no leaves have been noticed with them; but leaves of plants nearly allied, and perhaps belonging to this family, have been found near Whitby in the oolite formation, immediately above the lias, in the imperfect coal strata of the Cleaveland Moorlands; some of these are engraved by Messrs. Bird and Young §: others are in a collection from the same coal-field, made last year by Mr. Featherstonhaugh, and afford two varieties of leaves resembling those of Cycadeae, but which cannot be identified with any known species of that family.
M. Adolphe Brongniart also, in his account of the coal-field of Hber in Scania, the age of which is decidedly much more recent than the coal of Newcastle, and probably identical with the oolitic coal-field of Whitby, describes the occurrence therein of fronds of four species of plants, that have an analogy to the family of Cycadeae; and are accompanied by other vegetables differing entirely from those of the regular and more ancient coal strata. There is also a strong resemblance to the Cycadeae in some leaves I possess from the oolitic slate of Stonesfield.
From the same Stonesfield slate I have a fossil amentum called by Count Sternberg Conites Bucklandii, of which he has published a short account in his " Flore du Monde Primitiff," with a figure copied from a drawing by the late Mr. Sowerby. He describes it as a cone eight inches long and three inches in diameter, with scales most like those of the Pinus Abies, but not entirely agreeing with them, nor with those of any known species of cone; and proposes to refer it to a new genus among the Carpolites. This Conites so much resembles the amentum of Cycas circinalis, which blossomed in Edinburgh in May 1827, and of which an engraving and description are given by Dr. Hooker in the Botanical Magazine J, as to induce me to believe that it may be the amentum of a Cycadeoidea; but a much more minute comparison of the structures both of the fossil and of the amentum of a living Cycas than I have at present the means of making, must be undertaken before this point can be considered as established.
Thus dispersed through various members of the grand oolite formation or Jura limestone we have trunks and leaves, and perhaps organs of fructification, that may with much probability be all referred to our new fossil family of Cycadeoidea. We have the trunks in Portland, the leaves at Whitby and in Scania, and both leaves and amenta at Stonesfield; and though we are as yet without materials to show the specific relations of these parts to one another, we have evidence to prove the duration of one, or both, the cognate families of Cycadeae and Cycadeoideae to have extended from nearly the lowest to the uppermost beds of the oolite series.
M. Adolphe Brongniart has pointed out the inferences with respect to climate that may be drawn from the varying character of vegetable life in the three grand epochs of geological formation: viz. the great carboniferous period; the period of the secondary strata from lias to chalk inclusive; and the period of the tertiary strata above the chalk.
The plants before us render it probable that the climate of these regions, at the time when the oolites were deposited, was of the same warm temperature with that which produces a large proportion of the existing Cycadeae. M. Adolphe Brongniart is also of opinion that it exceeded the temperature of our modern tropics at a still more early period when it maintained the extraordinary vegetation of the great coal formation; and that it was less than tropical, though warmer than it is at present, in the period to which we owe our tertiary strata. To this theory I see much reason to incline, and confidently look forward to its future developement in the examination of the Flora of the fossil world, which he is now so actively conducting.
Dr. Buckland's Supplementary Remarks on the supposed Power of the Waters of the Irawadi, to convert Wood to Stone. 
London, October 29th, 1828.
I HAVE this day seen Dr. Wallich, and informed him of the Postscript added to my Paper on the fossil wood and bones from the Burman Empire, respecting the statement in Lieut. Alexander's Travels, that the teak pillars under a building near Prome had become petrified in the space of ten years, by the waters of the Irawadi during the monsoons. Dr. Wallich replied that, when he was at Rangoon with Mr. Crawfurd, they were informed by a British general officer, that there was at Prome an elephant shed, the pillars of which were converted to stone at their base. On arriving at Prome, they went to see this shed accompanied by the other gentlemen of the mission, and found its position to be above the flood level of the Irawadi, and that not one of its pillars had in any part undergone the smallest change from the natural state of wood.
In this case, therefore, as in that reported by Lieut. Alexander, it is probable that the officers had received without suspicion the current opinion of the natives, the universality of which may be referred to the constant use they make of fossil wood for weights and landing steps from the river. But the investigations of Mr. Crawfurd and Dr. Wallich seem decisive upon the subject: they were fully aware of the popular belief, that the soil of the country, as well as the waters of the Irawadi, have the property of rapidly converting wood to stone, and during the whole journey their attention was awake to every opportunity of verifying or refuting this opinion. Now I am informed by Dr. Wallich, that the bed of the Irawadi, all the way from Rangoon to Ava, was so thickly set with piles of wood that had formed the foundations of ancient temples, pagodas and sheds, that once at least, and sometimes more than once in every day, they were found to afford the steam-boat a more ready supply of substantial fuel than could be obtained from the shore; —in one case they were taken from water so deep that the steam-boat lay alongside of them during the operation of their extraction. A very large number of these pillars must, therefore, have been burnt during the voyage and the greater part of them had remained many years, and some of them probably hundreds of years, subject to partial or continual submersion in the waters of the Irawadi. Not the slightest trace of petrifaction was observed on any particle of all these pillars: and had it escaped the observation of the Botanical Professor, its presence (if existing) must have been detected in the fire. This evidence seems therefore not only to justify the assertion of Mr. Crawfurd,—that the waters of the Irawadi have no such petrifying power as the natives ascribe to them,—but also to confirm the opinion I have expressed in my Postscript, respecting the pillars of teak at Prome which are said to have been petrified throughout, in the short space of ten years. 
