
XXII.—On the Volcanic District of Naples. 
By G. POULETT SCROPE, ESQ., P.G.S. F.R.S. &C 
[Read March 2nd, 1827.]
1 HE volcanic formations of the vicinity of Naples, being for the most part easily accessible from that much-frequented capital, have been described in considerable detail by many geologists, particularly in the works of Menard de la Groye, Necker de Saussure, Brieslak, and the lately published volume of Dr. Daubeny. I intend therefore in the following memoir, to avoid as much as possible the repetition of facts already made public through these wellknown channels, and to confine myself to such observations as I do not remember to have seen in print, and such general views of the subject as our continually increasing knowledge of the mode of production of similar formations may appear to warrant.
I consider the volcanic district of Naples to include not only Somma, Vesuvius, the coast of Sorrento, and the immediate environs of Naples, Pozzuoli, and Cuma; but also the islands of Procida and Ischia, with which they are as closely connected in composition as in geographical situation. This linear group, which ranges N.E.—S.W., is terminated at either extremity by the two principal volcanic mountains of Ischia and Vesuvius. The latter, as I have mentioned in a previous memoir, seems to be in communication with the group of Albano and Rome, through the intervention of the Rocca Monfina and other minor vents of volcanic matter scattered along that remarkable longitudinal valley which divides the limestone range of the Sabine hills from the principal trunk of the Apennines. Another chain of volcanic products seems to take off also from Ischia towards the Ponza group, through the islands of Ventotiene and San Stefano, maintaining a parallel direction with that first mentioned, and indeed with the general range of the escarpment of the elevated Apennine strata, at the foot of which these explosions have found an issue.
It is certainly a remarkable confirmation of the opinion elsewhere expressed, as to the general parallelism of lines of volcanic eruption to the nearest linear ranges of elevated strata, that not only is there along the western coast of Italy this correspondence between two decided trains of volcanic vents, and the two parallel ranges of the Sabine mountains and the Apennines; but also, where a massive embranchment breaks off from the latter at nearly a right angle, forming the promontory which bounds the bay of Naples to the S.E. and the almost continuous island of Capri, a corresponding line of volcanic vents (viz. that connecting Vesuvius with Ischia,) is found to take off from the principal line, at no great distance, and at the same angle, so as consequently to run parallel with the transverse elevated range.
If we call to mind the general tendency of the rocks composing the secondary strata to yield to any disruptive force along fracture-lines at right angles, or nearly so, one to another, it will appear highly credible that this parallelism in two directions of the ranges of elevation and eruption, has been influenced, here as elsewhere, by that general, though at first sight insignificant, cause.
Within the space above limited, the volcanic force has at times developed itself in single eruptions, from a considerable number of irregularly scattered points; but has shown a decided preference to two principal and habitual vents, Vesuvius or Somma, and Ischia. These by the accumulated products of repeated eruptions have swelled into bulky excrescences, which exhibit, though with some difference, the characteristic features of ordinary volcanic mountains. Of the two, Ischia has been decidedly the most prolific source of erupted matter; since that portion of it which is seen above the water-level surpasses Somma considerably in bulk, and a great part of its mass must be supposed hidden by the sea. These two mountains also differ materially in figure and constitution. This is chiefly attributable to the different mineral character of the lavas which each has emitted.
Somma is an exceedingly regular volcanic mountain, though on a small scale; its lavas, (at least all that are disclosed to view) are of leucitic basalt; and although its conglomerates are not entirely basaltic, some containing a large proportion of pumice and feldspathose lava-blocks, yet these are unaccompanied by any masses of trachyte in situ, and may be supposed to be the scattered fragments of some of the inferior beds belonging to an earlier eruptive aera, at which the volcano may have been productive of trachyte, and broken up by some of the later paroxysmal explosions.
However this may be, all the visible lavas and the greater part of the conglomerates of Somma are basaltic; and owing to the great fluidity of lavas of this mineral character, they have, when protruded from the common vent, taken their course in spreading sheets down the outer slope of the mountain; while the scoriae and fragmentary matters, projected at the same time into the air, were spread pretty evenly over them: so that the result of successive eruptions of this kind has been the formation of a very regularly conical mountain, with a gradually diminishing slope on all sides, from the central heights to the plain around; exhibiting in the ravines that furrow its sides, as well as in the abrupt sections afforded by the walls of the great crater, its composition of repeatedly alternating beds of basalt and basaltic conglomerates, more or less irregular in thickness, but dipping uniformly on all sides away from the vent, with an inclination corresponding exactly to the external slopes of the mountain.
The eruptions of Somma seem very rarely to have taken place from any other than the central vent. The small cone on which the Camaldoli della Torre is built, and those still smaller ones immediately above Torre del Greco, which were thrown up by the eruption of 1794, are the only indications of explosions having burst forth from the side of the mountain. The vast number of vertical basaltic dykes which intersect the horizontal beds observable in the broken cliffs of the old crater (Atrio del Cavallo) bear witness, however, that the lava was not so frequently elevated to the summit of the mountain without occasioning numberless cracks and rents in its inmost structure; which, though occupied immediately hy the liquid lava, seem never but in the instances above-mentioned, to have opened so far as to allow the explosions to find their way out at the side of the cone. There is great reason to conclude that the old crater of Somma, whose steep walls now half encircle the cone of Vesuvius, was formed by the celebrated paroxysm of the year 79, which occasioned the death of the elder Pliny. The enormous quantity of fragmentary matter projected into the air by the explosions of that eruption, which not only buried Herculaneum, Pompeii, and Stabiae, under a bed from thirty to one hundred feet in thickness, but seems to have covered Naples itself to a depth of about ten feet, (as appears in the excavations behind the Studii Reali*,) and filled the atmosphere to such a degree as to produce complete darkness, according to Pliny the younger, for nearly three days, must have left a proportinate cavity in the mountain. The very analogous, though minor explosions of 1822, which completely gutted the cone of Vesuvius, leaving a crater a mile in diameter, and at least eight hundred feet in depth, did not eject a sufficient body of ashes and fragments to cover the base of the mountain to more than the average depth of a foot; nor at Naples, though the wind mostly set that way during the twenty days continuance of the eruption, did they fall to the depth of a quarter of an inch. The crater produced by the eruption of 79 ought then to have been greater than that of 1822 in the proportion of the greater mass of projected fragments; and the apparent size of the crater of Sorama, which measures about three miles in diameter, is certainly rather within than beyond what would be anticipated from this consideration.
In this view then, previous to the eruption of 79, Somma, or rather Vesuvius, (for it had then but one appellation,) was a regularly conical mountain with perhaps a flattish or but slightly depressed surface at the top; and the scanty notices we have received of its figure from Strabo and other writers of that period, correspond with this supposition. The eruptions that occurred after this epoch must have thrown up a parasitic cone in the centre of the great crater; and if we suppose the walls that circumscribed this cavity to have been considerably lower towards the sea than on the opposite side, it is obvious that in course of time the lava produced by the central cone, must have filled up the crater so far as to pour over its edge, and thence descend towards the sea. That portion of the circumference of the ancient crater which was in this manner over-flooded and concealed from view, is yet marked out most clearly by a terrace-like projection called the Pedamentina, which encircles the base of the recent cone of Vesuvius on the south side, and exactly continues the circular sweep of the remaining walls of the crater which still exist on the north; the axis of the present cone being precisely the centre of this circle. There is nothing incredible in the idea of the entire massive cone of Vesuvius having been formed since the year 79. We are acquainted with the dates of above fifty very considerable eruptions since that epoch; and less than the fourth of that number, were they as productive of volcanic matter as the eruption which broke out from the flank of Etna, and overwhelmed Catania with its lava in 1669, would have sufficed to build up the actual cone of Vesuvius*.
I have dwelt the longer on these facts in the history of Somma, as attested by its structure, because I observe that the mode of creation of this very simple volcanic mountain, which indeed may be taken as a type of such formations, is not yet generally well understood; and that writers of high authority still continue to speak,—sometimes, of its craters being owing to the falling-in of the sides of the mountain, instead of to their being blown into the air through the violence of its explosions;—sometimes, of the whole mountain having been produced by the elevation of flat strata on their edges round a central aperture, by force of elastic gases. Von Buch is the inventor of this last idea, which Dr. Daubeny and some other authors, I believe Humboldt amongst them, support.
Now the cone of Vesuvius we know to have been created, not in this imagined manner, but by the repeated superposition of one volcanic bed on another, all flowing from a central source; a process which cannot fail to produce this peculiar form of hill, (as is shown in the mud cones of air-volcanoes, which no one ever thought of attributing to the heaving up of solid strata of clay upon their edges). Again: the crater of Vesuvius, excavated from the entrails of the volcano by the eruption of 1822, shows the internal structure and constitution of this cone to be exactly similar to that of Somma, as seen in the Atrio del Cavallo. Their external figure and other features are also perfectly alike, allowing for the difference in size and age; and it would be therefore irrational to invent for the cone of Somma an unexampled mode of production, entirely different from that by whirh thp samp volcano has created, as it were before our eyes, the analogous cone of Vesuvius. The argument, if conceded with respect to Somma, will extend of course to the other regularly conical volcanic mountains in the Canaries or elsewhere, to which this process of formation from elevated strata has been attributed,—the Erhebung's cratere of Von Buch.
At the same time it is not to be doubted that the continual and often violent earthquake shocks which accompany the eruptions of every habitual volcano, are connected, or rather are occasioned by, elevatory expansions of the solid beds forming the frame-work of the'mountain, through the disruptive force of the lava injected from below. The clefts broken in this way across the sides of the cone are no doubt the origin of many of those deep fissure-like gorges (barancos) which furrow the slopes of iEtna, Teneriffe, and other volcanic mountains of a large size. All I contend for is, that the parallel and sloping beds, which, with a quaqua-versal dip compose every such mountain, were not deposited horizontally, or otherwise than at a high angle of inclination; and that the angular elevation they have since sustained, is in general comparatively trifling:—in short, that the conoidal form preserved by an habitual volcanic mountain in every stage of its formation, is owing to the same obvious cause which communicates the similar figure to a simple volcanic hillock, the produce of a single eruption,—viz. the accumulation of erupted matters round a central orifice.
To return to Ischia.—Unlike that of Vesuvius, though at so short a distance from it, this volcanic vent has produced not a single leucite, and none but feldspathose lavas, trachytes, or graystone lavas approaching to trachyte. These (probably owing to their very inferior fluidity compared with the basaltic lavas*,) seem rarely to have flowed in thin sheets or narrow streams down the slopes of the parent mountain, but have usually taken the form of bulky excrescences, projecting like promontories from its flanks or summit; and they have moreover often burst out from lateral openings at no great height from its base, throwing up parasitic cones, consisting of fragmentary trachyte, pitchstone, spongiform scoriae and pumice, and usually containing an internal basin. The mountain has thus assumed a deformed and irregular figure f, though still preserving a general tendency to the conoidal; and this irregularity has been no doubt much increased by the convulsive elevatory shocks which seem to have rent and displaced its component beds on many points, as well as by the vast degradation which the tufas making up the greater part of its bulk have suffered from atmospheric and aqueous erosion.
Of these tufas, some are loose and incoherent, others indurated, apparently by intimate mixture with water at the time of their deposition, in the manner of the trass of the Rhine volcanoes. The indurated have of course resisted the agents of destruction far more effectually than the incoherent; and these therefore, together with the solid lava-rocks, form the most prominent masses of the visible framework of the mountain. The tufa of Ischia has a very prevalent tinge of green, occasioned apparently by the intermixture ofchloritic particles, or of augite under some casual modification. The trachytic lavas of the island vary much in mineral character. The generality are dark coloured, hard, and crystalline, resembling the rock of the Solfatara. Some are remarkable for very large agglomerations of glassy feldspar crystals; others for their zoned, ribboned, and brecciated appearance, enveloping rounded as well as angular fragments of very different varieties of trachyte, melting into their matrix; which cannot but recall the similar nodules that occur in the porphyries of the old red-sandstone, and in some granites. The trachytic hummock called Monte Tabor, which has been protruded from the foot of a large cone composed of pumice and ashes, called Montagnone, is, in part, of this variegated nature. Elsewhere it passes into compact and slaty clinkstone; and thence again into a very large-grained and saccharine trachyte, of a dead-leaf colour, composed of glassy felspar. It rests on an outcropping bed of tertiary clay, full of shells, (of the subapennine formation,) which is extracted for making pottery, from excavations opened under the trachyte.
The Lava del Arso, produced by the eruption of 1302, has been fully described by preceding writers. The point from which it issued in the side of the mountain is marked by a very small crater surrounded by a circular ridge composed of loose black and red scoriae, containing numerous felspar crystals, spongy, light, and approaching (as do all the scoriae of the graystone lavas) to pumice. Near the summit of the Monte Epomeo, the highest eminence of this conoidal island, are distinct traces of two very large craters. That facing the south seems to have been of very large dimensions, and the principal vent of the explosions of the volcano.
Vesuvius and Ischia stand at the two extremities of the district I have undertaken to describe. The interval between them presents a considerable number of ridgy and more or less insulated hills, of very inferior size and height, rising from the sea-shore, or from the general level of the plain of the Terra di Lavoro. They are composed, without exception, of trachytic conglomerate (or tufa), of which the greater part is consolidated into a rock resembling trass; and, though exceedingly light and porous, of sufficient coherence to be in general use at Naples as building-stone. This rock is stratified, or rather, like most alluvial conglomerates, zoned by alternating layers of different-sized fragments. Above it, is generally seen a series of similar and conformable layers of incoherent tufa or lapillo; of which also the flat ground between and around the hills consists to the extreme depth disclosed by ravines or other excavations. 
Many of these hills have the ordinary figure of simple volcanic cones, with a central depression or crater. Such are the Monte Barbaro, the Solfatara, Astroni, Capomazza, the hills surrounding the Lago d'Averno, the Monte Nuovo, the western point of Procida, the Capo di Miseno, and the little island of Nisida. Others have the form of steep and narrow ridges, only partially embracing the hollows which appear to have been their craters; whilst some ridges run lengthways to a considerable distance in nearly a straight line, and offer few external indications of their volcanic nature.
The uniform internal structure and composition, however, of these hills* which is here and there observable in ravines, quarries, or abrupt cliffs undermined by the breach of the sea, proves them all to have been produced by the same process; namely, the accumulation of fragmentary trachyte and pumice projected from one or more volcanic apertures. Their component strata are invariably mantle-shaped, i. e. dip both ways from the axis of the ridge, a characteristic feature of all volcanic cones, dependent on their peculiar mode of formation, and which may be employed as a very useful and accurate guide towards fixing the localities of extinct vents of eruption. The northern escarpment of the Capo di Miseno exhibits this structure very satisfactorily, as likewise does the sea-ward bluff of the isle of Nisida, and the segment of a crater in the bay of Baias near the village of Bacoli.
The only one of these hills of which the date is known is the Monte Nuovo, thrown up in the year 1538; and this differs in no material points from the others, except that its constituent fragments have rather less of felspar in their mineral composition. Its scoria; are indeed mostly filamentous, passing into pumice, But heavier and of a darker colour than the ordinary type of this mineral; and the fragments of solid lava, of which a very large quantity is scattered over the outer slopes of the hill, approach to clinkstone in appearance, are schistose, and often (which is remarkable,) veined with laminae of pitchstone. Indeed many pieces are met with that contain passages from an earthy clinkstone to pitchstone, and thence into pumice. In these specimens it appears evident that the clinkstone has been partially changed by fusion into pitchstone, and this by the sudden development of aeriform fluids into pumice. These different modifications of the same substance alternate with one another in repeated zones within the same block, and are such as would probably be produced by exposing to artificial heat a mass of this rock, in which some laminae might be, from their peculiar mineral character or fineness of grain, inclined to enter into fusion more readily than others. The more or less rapid cooling of the substance has, here, at least, had no effect in modifying its texture.
Next to the Monte Nuovo, the cone which may be judged to have been most recently produced is that of the Solfatara, whose well known phaenomena attest that a mass of lava still exists beneath it at an intense temperature, sending forth through superficial fissures torrents of aqueous vapour impregnated with sulphuretted hydrogen. This gas, on coming in contact with the atmosphere, combines with its oxygen into sulphuric acid, which produces a series of remarkable alterations in both the tufa and compact trachyte on which it is deposited: the former, from the greater facility with which it is penetrated by the acid, being affected to a great depth; the latter only superficially. Sulphates of alumine, iron, lime, magnesia, and soda, result from the decomposition of these rocks by the sulphuric acid; and their silex left nearly pure, in the form of a white earthy powder, is carried down by the rains, and deposited in thin beds in the lower levels of the crater. The very porous nature of these beds no doubt occasions the loud reverberation produced when they are struck sharply, which is vulgarly attributed to the existence of a vast vaulted cavity beneath. They consist of a very fine white clay, indurated by heat, and penetrated by numerous vesicular cavities, occasioned by the generation of some gaseous fluid during its consolidation: in all probability by the rarefaction of the air or water it contained, while exposed in the soft state of mud to the influence of the heat transmitted from the volcanic focus below. This hardened clay is divided into the finest laminae, much thinner than paper, has the appearance of tripoli, and might probably be applied to the same uses.
I have in another place* dwelt sufficiently at length on the futility of supposing any cavity, vaulted or not, to exist under a volcano. The very circumstance of the violent protrusion of solid and liquid matters, which constitute the characteristic phaenomena of an eruption, sufficiently proves that, so far from there being at that time any empty space beneath it, there is too little room for the mass of heated matter already confined there in a state of enormous tension by the weight and tenacity of the overlying rocks, and which in consequence at length uplifts or bursts through them with a sudden and violent intumescence. After every eruption, the residuum of ebullient lava left in the volcanic focus, having been by the generation of vapour throughout its substance cooled down below the temperature of the surrounding mass, begins immediately to receive rather than to part with caloric, and consequently to augment not to diminish its tension. No cavity can therefore be formed during this time.
The Solfatara has produced a massive current of trachyte, which stretches with a gradual slope in the form of a rocky promontory, into the sea. The upper extremity (called Monte Olibano) impends over the crater of the Solfatara in a precipitous cliff. It is hardly necessary to say that the crater must of course have been hollowed out by aeriform explosions subsequently to the flowing of this lava, which is a decided trachyte, but varies extremely in grain, texture, and even in mineral character. The upper part of the current contains much less augite than the lower, and its felspar crystals are larger and more numerous. The upper parts are also porous and cellular; while the interior of the rock is as compact, hard, and crystalline as granite. Indeed this stone is quarried for ornamental purposes,—such as columns,—taking an excellent polish, and when worked up being scarcely distinguishable from gray granite. Irregular fissures divide it into rude prismatic masses. Blocks of a dark-coloured and dense pumice, of porphyritic pitchstone, and pearlstone of a dull greenish colour, occur among the ejected fragments strewn over the outer slopes of the cone.
One of the most interesting products of the chemical processes which are continually carried on by Nature in the Solfatara, but which has not to my knowledge been described by any of its visitors, is the abundance of globular concretions formed of concentric laminae, which are created in the decomposed trachyte, evidently by the exertion of the affinities of some of its elementary molecules, to which the disintegration of the rock gave the requisite freedom of action. Other globular concretions, but of a more simple structure, (pisolites,) are common in the loose conglomerate of this and the other neighbouring hills, and owe their origin most probably to drops of rain falling on very finely comminuted volcanic ashes, and uniting them into spherical globules; a phaenomenon that happened before my eyes on the surface of Vesuvius, during the rains which followed the copious showers of ashes thrown up by that volcano in October 1822. The Solfatara is recorded as having been in eruption A.D. 1180; and, if this account is to be credited, the present crater of this hill must have been produced at that late epoch. This idea is certainly supported by the great heat still evolved with the vapours from its bottom, and also by the occurrence of a small bed of a light and scoriform trachytic lava, of recent aspect, on the summit of Monte Olibano, resting upon the strata of loose tufa which cover the principal mass of trachyte. The whole hill in this case must have possessed a somewhat different figure from the present, when it bore the name of Colles Leucogei, though that name, and the early celebrity of its hot mineral springs, prove its phenomena to have but slightly, if at all, varied in the interval.
Next perhaps to the Solfatara in recentness of origin, we should rank the small hill called Capo-mazza, a cone of great regularity occupying the interval between that hill and the Monte Barbaro. It has a circular but shallow crater at the summit, nearly filled, indeed, by the washings from the very friable strata which encircle it. These, as well as the whole substance of the hill, consist of a loose conglomerate, composed of extremely silky, light, and fibrous pumice, and its detritus. Similar fragments are scattered thinly on the surface of the Monte Barbaro and the other neighbouring hills, covering a vegetable mould, and were probably projected there by the eruption which produced the hill of Capo-mazza at no very distant period.
The cone of Astroni is remarkable for its wide and deep crater, surrounded by almost perpendicular banks; for the occurrence of a small parasitic cone in the middle of the flat plain which forms the floor of this cavity; and for the rock of trachyte, similar to that of Olibano, which shows itself on one part of the basin, cropping out from the conglomerate which composes the chief part of the cone.
The hills that encircle the Lakes Averno and Agnano have nothing peculiar in their constitution; consisting, like the last, of beds of loose feldspathose conglomerate containing large blocks of pumice. The Lago d'Averno was fathomed during my residence at Naples by Captain Smith, who had the kindness to communicate the result to me. It appears to be from 100 to 102 feet in depth; beginning to shoal in gradually on all sides, at a distance of about forty feet from the bank. The Lago d'Agnano is a much larger and, I believe, shallower basin: but there is little reason to doubt its resulting equally from volcanic explosions; though the hills thrown up around appear to have been much defaced, and their declivities smoothed by meteoric agency, and perhaps also by the addition of ejected matter from other neighbouring vents. There is a strong resemblance between this lake-basin and that of Kloster-laach near Andernach, which is however somewhat larger. The Lago di Ronciglione in the territory of Viterbo is another very similar cavity, and encircled by hills of precisely the same aspect and structure. All are evidently craters produced by the sudden and rapid explosions of a paroxysmal eruption.
The Monte Barbaro, (the Gaurus inanis of Juvenal,) though one of the largest and highest cones of the Phlegrasan fields, is nevertheless evidently the product of but a single eruption. The crater is extremely deep and large, about a mile in diameter, circular, and perfect, with the exception of two breaches exactly facing one another, on the east and west,—which, however, do not penetrate half-way down to the flat and cultivated plain that occupies the bottom of this remarkable cavity. The rent to the west fronts the Monte Nuovo, and was probably caused by some convulsive shock attendant on the eruption of 1538. Monte Barbaro is composed throughout of indurated tufa, stratified in a direction exactly conformable to its surfaces both internal and external, and therefore dipping away on either side of a supposed vertical and cylindrical band dropped from the ridge of the cone.
The hill, on the summit of which stands the convent of Camaldoli, to the north of Naples, is still higher than that last described; measuring 1643 feet from the sea. It is, however, by no means so regular in form or structure. There are appearances of a crater on the side towards Naples, but the thick woods, with which its slopes are covered, render this indistinct. The opposite side facing the north presents a very steep escarpment; at the foot of which, near the village of Pianura, a massive bed of trachytic lava, covered with a thick layer of loose conglomerate, crops out from under the prodigious thickness of indurated tufa which composes all the upper part of the mountain. This rock is quarried copiously, being in great request at Naples for steps, flagging, jambs, and all purposes which require a harder material than the tufa. It is known there by the name of Piperno. The galleries pierced for the extraction of this stone, run a considerable way under the hill. It is an earthy and porous trachyte of a dark ash-gray colour, of which the base is composed almost entirely of crystals of felspar, with a very few of augite, but is interspersed in a remarkable manner with lenticular or flattish masses; of a much darker and harder substance, in which augitic matter predominates, and of which the texture is close-grained, and structure cellular. It would seem that there has taken place throughout this lava a concretionary separation of the augitic from the felspathose particles, apparently analogous to the process by which flints are formed in chalk, or lenticular nodules of marl in'clay. The difference of texture and structure between the parts is to be accounted for by the difference in the size of their grain; the augitic matter being fine, the feldspathose coarse; owing to which, the latter remain separated by pores or rude interstices, while the former was sufficiently liquid to allow of the formation of vesicles. The augitic concretions are lengthened, as was observed by Brieslak, in the direction in which the lava appears to have flowed;—a fact which proves the concretionary process to have taken effect before the lava had settled completely in its present situation.
A trachytic lava with nearly the same characters, and aptly illustrating this peculiar internal modification of the piperno, is met with amongst the products of the neighbouring volcano of Rocca-Monfina near Sessa and St. Agata, and likewise at Sorrento. In these places the feldspathose base of the rock is still more earthy, porous, and loosely granular than at Pianura; so much so, indeed, as to be with difficulty distinguishable from tufa; and the augitic concretions are also more fine-grained, compact, and vesicular, so as to resemble spongiform scoriae. It is obvious that, in proportion to this difference in bulk of the respective mineral particles of the lava, will have been the facility afforded to the minute augitic matter to agglomerate, by a sort of drainage through the coarse, porous, and loosely aggregated mass of felspar crystals.
The rock which formed the Acropolis of that most ancient Greek city, Cumae, has in the wear and tear of ages, lost the characteristic figure, but still retains the structure, of a volcanic cone. From the midst of the tufa of this hill a massive rock of trachyte emerges, which varies very much in mineral character, being in some places identical with the rock of the Solfatara, in others a complete clinkstone. Parts are zoned with concretionary blotches and stripes of very different texture and mineral composition, like the piperno; and others pass into a breccia from the quantity of what appear to be enveloped fragments and nodular masses of variously coloured trachyte, resembling precisely on these points the rock of Lacco in Ischia.
To the south of Cumae rises the Monte di Procida, a long ridgy hill composed of a trachytic conglomerate in irregular strata, which, on the sea-ward side, are observed to rest upon a thin bed of trachytic lava under peculiar circumstances. The colour of this rock is nearly black, notwithstanding it? feldspathose nature, and that it fuses before the blowpipe into a light-coloured glass; its texture is earthy and porous, fracture uneven; it contains numerous very brilliant crystals of glassy felspar, and the interior of almost every block or division of the rock consists of porphyritic pitchstone, appearing to proceed from its partial fusion. No well-defined limit separates this lava from the conglomerate above, which, on the contrary, appears to pass into it by the fusion of its finer particles, and the torrefaction of the larger. The conglomerate envelops large loose fragments of granite and syenite. It would seem that this bed, or rather horizontal dyke, has either been originally of great extent, or that similar circumstances have produced the same peculiar appearances on three or four neighbouring points; for, at about three hundred yards distance, a rocky ledge rises from the sea, (called Scoglio delle pietre arse, The rock of burnt stones), composed of a pitchstone coated with earthy lava, and enveloping half-melted fragments of various kinds, exactly like that, of the Monte di Procida; and the eastern angle of the island of Procida, immediately opposite and more than a mile distant, exhibits a similar bed, which is here seen to rest upon as well as to support the conglomerate, the whole being covered by stratified tufa. 
The same island presents traces of three or four distinct craters, which have been much degraded, owing to its exposure to a heavy sea-swell both from the north-west and south. It appears composed throughout of a frame-work of indurated tufa covered with strata of the same substance in an incoherent state. One bed of trachytic lava enveloped in the tufa, is visible in the cliffs on the north-western side of the island.
The promontory of Misenum has been once a very perfect cone with a regular crater, but the action of the waves has worn it away nearly to the centre, by which a fine natural section is afforded of the mass of indurated tufa of which it consists. The mantle-form disposition of the strata dipping away from the circular ridge, already noticed as characteristic of a volcanic cone, is no where better exemplified.
The island of Nisida also is a small but very regular cone, with a crater into which the sea has at length effected its entrance, by a breach on the western and exposed side. The bluff cliffs disclosed by this continual degradation show the same internal structure as those of Misenum.
Close upon Nisida rises the promontory of Pausilipo, a long and narrow ridge, connected with three or four similar hills called the Vomero, Capo di Chino, and Capo di Monte, which rise immediately behind Naples, and on a part indeed of which that town is built. All are composed chiefly of solid tufa, stratified mantle-wise; but though they partly embrace three or four decidedly crateriform basins, they have little of the regularity of ordinary cones. In the solid tufa quarried out of these hills I have found shells of the genera ostrea, cardium, buccinum, and patella, differing in nothing from the species that at present inhabit the bay of Naples: also pieces of unmineralized wood, retaining great flexibility of fibre, and burning with a slow flame and a resinous smell. The loose conglomerate of Capo di Chino envelops burnt and half-fused fragments of indurated tufa passing into porphyritic pitchstone, masses of this last substance with a minute globular concretionary structure (pearlstone), and others passing into complete obsidian; besides pumice, and a great variety of feldspathose lavas in fragments. At Capo di Monte vertical veins are observed to penetrate the hard tufa-rock. They are from six inches to two feet in width, and consist equally of tufa, but of a very fine grain, extremely hard, with a conchoidal fracture, and seamed with parallel stripes of a coarser grain. The appearance of these veins suggests the idea of their having resulted from fissures formed in the tufa before it was entirely consolidated, and filled by a deposit of its finest particles, from the water that exuded into the cleft from either side. Indeed the hard tufa, of which, as is seen from the foregoing account, the volcanic hills of the neighbourhood of Naples are almost exclusively formed, seems evidently to owe its coherence, like the trass of the Rhine provinces, to a setting, or aggregative process which took place in a body of finely triturated trachyte intimately mixed with water, as that fluid drained off, or was squeezed out by the incumbent pressure. In the formations under review, this admixture with water appears to have been owing to the circumstance of the volcanic vents having burst out under the level of the sea, though in so shallow a spot that the accumulated ejections soon raised the cones to a certain height above the water-level; in consequence of which the materials subsequently thrown up, falling dry on the surface of the newly-raised island, remained in a loose state. Every one of the hills in question is indeed covered to a greater or less depth by strata of loose tufaceous conglomerate, conformable and sometimes graduating into the hard tufa below. The Monte Nuovo, which was thrown up in the middle of the Lucrine lake, has, like the other hills, a foundation of indurated tufa covered by loose conglomerate. The same loose arenaceous conglomerate, but evidently stratified by water, composes the flat spaces between the volcanic hills, and also the surface of the whole plain of the Terra di Lavoro, up to the foot of the Apennines; penetrating even their principal valleys to a considerable height,—as for example those of Maddeloni, Caserta, &c.,—having to all appearance been drifted there by the sea at a time when it washed the base of that chain.
It seems then that this part, at least, of the western coast of Italy has suffered an elevation of some hundred feet since the epoch of eruption of the greater number of volcanic mouths whose products we have been employed in examining, and which are certainly much more recent than the tertiary or subapennine formation. In this elevation, it is at least probable that the whole chain of the Apennines shared; and indeed there are traces of it in the limestone cliffs of the Monte Circello and the Calabrian coast, which are in some parts thickly perforated by recent lithophagi at a height of more than a hundred feet from the present level of the sea*.
Whether this elevation took place at once, or by successive heavings accompanying the earthquakes which have habitually affected the Western Apennines, from Rome to Palermo, is a question which it requires further inquiries to elucidate. From my own observations, I should be inclined to doubt that any sensible change has taken place in the relative level of the land and water round Naples since the Roman aera, (the few facts which have been brought forwards to support the idea of such change being contradictory, and to be otherwise explained); and for this reason I should prefer the conclusion,—that the rise of the plains of Campania from below the sea was produced by some convulsive crisis of subterraneous expansion, occasioned perhaps by the long obstruction of the superficial vents,—those natural safety-valves that by their occasional activity at present, may be supposed to obviate the recurrence of such tremendous operations.
The south-eastern side of the bay of Naples likewise contains some scattered volcanic formations. They show: themselves in the recesses of the limestone mountains, both at Vico and Sorrento. No crater or regular cone is discoverable; but unequal deposits of tufa enveloping massive beds of trachytic lava, of an ash-gray colour, extremely light, porous, earthy, and brittle, show themselves'on. many points; particularly around Sorrento, where they form a plain backed by a crested range of limestone, and appearing to have been levelled by the action of the sea, though it is now raised more than two hundred feet above the actual shore,—an additional fact in favour of the recent elevation of this line of coast.
At the Punto di Campanella, the extremity of this promontory (which is itself composed of a sandstone, probably the new red, cropping out from below the great formation of Apennine limestone near Massa), another deposit of tufa is met with, which contains masses of obsidian coloured with various shades of blue, and frequently showing the small globular concretionary structure (pearlstone). The globules are concentric, but not radiated.
